From: Miles Johannessen <milesnjohannessen@gmail.com>
Date: Thu, Sep 19, 2024 at 9:23 PM
Subject: Stuart Sinclair Regatta Report

The 2024 Stuart Sinclair regatta was one for the books!

This annual regatta has found its home on the shores of Penn Cove these
last few years and has become one of the most fun and unique regattas
around. With work starting to spread about this, people are coming from
far afield to see for themselves!

The weekend started out a bit depressing with heavy rain greeting those
who showed up on Friday. This rain also put a damper on Fridays planned
fun ‘Triangle” race. We will need to keep this idea on the shelf for
next year!

Saturday brought much better conditions with partially overcast skies
and breeze between 4 and 7 knots. After a brief delay the fleet of 17
boats launched off the beach in a SW wind and a course set further near
the Coupeville pier, just a 5 minute sail from the PCYC. The first four
races of the day followed a similar pattern: oscillating breeze
gradually shifting left. Starts were crucial in the shifty wind and the
fleet was pushing the line hard.

After a big pre-start shift in race 5 made for a quick reach-reach
course, race 6 delivered the most consistent conditions of the day with
the wind having slowly swung all the way around to an easterly.

Some standout performances on Day 1 were Rich and Jeff sailing
a borrowed boat with consistently good starts and boat positioning. Mike
and Carol used their excellent boatspeed to snatch four third-place
finishes and a bullet to cap off the day. Paul/Cedric, Doug/Nalu, and
Cynthia/Charles were always in the mix as well. It was also great to see
Courtney and Curran out for the inaugural sail of their new-to-them
boat.

The après activities are where this regatta and its amazing hosts truly
shine. Racers were greeted back at the beach with cold kegs, hot grills,
and 40 of their best friends! Not to mention a pretty killer view! After
a great evening, everyone retired to their tents on the beach to see
what the next day would have in store.

Sunday dawned with little wind but some welcome sun. After a great
breakfast of bacon and pancakes, we got to the task of basking in the
sun and waiting for wind. After about an hour delay, an unforcasted but
steady easterly filled in and the fleet rolled dollies down the beach
and headed out.

Sailing just east of Penn cove Sunday brought 3 races in 5 to 8 knots
with off and on trapezing upwind. The first two races saw large winning
margins by Jeff & Rich and Mike & Carol. Pierre and Langdon were
blisteringly quick as well with second place finishes in every race of
the day. Sunday’s racing also featured more stable wind than Saturday
which took a bit of importance away from having the best start and added
passing lanes throughout the racing.

Ben and I were fortunate to have a good points cushion from Saturday and
were able to take the win. Rich and Jeff ended up second with Mike and
Carol close behind. All podium finishers were stoked to take home some
engraved Yeti goodies!

Despite the lighter than hoped for wind, the Stuart Sinclair regatta
easily lived up to its reputation as the most fun weekend around! With
17 boats on the line, it seems like a 20 boat regatta is well within
reach next year.

Huge thanks to Chris & Anne and their crew of helpers for hosting. Also
a big thanks to Dan, Ian, Erik, Kevin, and all the others who helped
with Race Committee! Mark your calendars for Stuart Sinclair 2025 on
August 16th and 17th 2025!

------------------------------

https://48north.com/racing/race-reports/2024-stuart-sinclair-regatta-recap/

2024 Stuart Sinclair Regatta Recap
September 25, 2024|In Race Reports, Featured|By Miles Johannessen
HomeRacingRace Reports2024 Stuart Sinclair Regatta Recap

This annual regatta has found its home on the shores of Penn Cove these
last few years and has become one of the most fun and unique regattas
around. With work starting to spread, people are coming from far afield
to see for themselves!

The weekend of August 23-25 started out a bit depressing with heavy rain
greeting those who showed up on Friday. This rain also put a damper on
Fridays planned fun ‘Triangle’ race. We will need to keep this idea on
the shelf for next year!

Saturday brought much better conditions with partially overcast skies
and breeze between 4 to 7 knots. After a brief delay, the fleet of 17
boats launched off the beach in a southwest wind and a course set
farther near the Coupeville pier, just a 5 minute sail from the Penn
Cove Yacht Club (PCYC). The first four races of the day followed
a similar pattern: oscillating breeze gradually shifting left. Starts
were crucial in the shifty wind and the fleet was pushing the line hard.

After a big pre-start shift in race five made for a quick reach-reach
course, race six delivered the most consistent conditions of the day
with the wind having slowly swung all the way around to an easterly.

Some standout performances on Day 1 were Rich and Jeff sailing
a borrowed boat with consistently good starts and boat positioning. Mike
and Carol used their excellent boatspeed to snatch four third place
finishes and a bullet to cap off the day. Paul/Cedric, Doug/Nalu, and
Cynthia/Charles were always in the mix as well. It was also great to see
Courtney and Curran out for the inaugural sail of their new-to-them
boat.

The après activities are where this regatta and its amazing hosts truly
shine. Racers were greeted back at the beach with cold kegs, hot grills,
and 40 of their best friends—not to mention a pretty killer view! After
a great evening, everyone retired to their tents on the beach to see
what the next day would have in store.

Sunday dawned with little wind but some welcome sun. After a great
breakfast of bacon and pancakes, we got to the task of basking in the
sun and waiting for wind. After about an hour delay, an unforcasted but
steady easterly filled in and the fleet rolled dollies down the beach
and headed out.

Sailing just east of Penn Cove Sunday brought three races in 5 to
8 knots with off and on trapezing upwind. The first two races saw large
winning margins by Jeff and Rich and Mike and Carol. Pierre and Langdon
were blisteringly quick as well with second place finishes in every race
of the day. Sunday’s racing also featured more stable wind than
Saturday, which took a bit of importance away from having the best start
and added passing lanes throughout the racing.

Ben and I were fortunate to have a good points cushion from Saturday and
were able to take the win. Rich and Jeff ended up second with Mike and
Carol close behind. All podium finishers were stoked to take home some
engraved Yeti goodies!

Despite the lighter than hoped for wind, the Stuart Sinclair Regatta
easily lived up to its reputation as the most fun weekend around! With
17 boats on the line, it seems like a 20 boat regatta is well within
reach next year.

Huge thanks to Chris and Anne and their crew of helpers for hosting.
Also, a big thanks to Dan, Ian, Erik, Kevin, and all the others who
helped with Race Committee! Mark your calendars for Stuart Sinclair 2025
on August 16th and 17th 2025!

