2001 International 505 World Championship Cascais Portugal, September

19-28 Last updated 27 October by Alexander Meller Race Graph images and
results used with kind permission of myskipper.com and Aires Afonseca,
who were responsible for the outstanding event web site, which was
updated each day with reports, photographs, race graphs etc. Apart from
being a really to notch event web site, I really appreciated not having
to do any of the work myself.  Photos by Alexander Meller and others who
I handed the camera to.

Getting to Cascais, Portugal The terrorist attacks on the World Trade
Center Towers and the Pentagon left me – and most others – stunned. My
office was about one kilometer from the Pentagon; my window shook when
the plane struck, I was busy reading articles on the web about the World
Trade Center attacks, and did not realize what had happened at the
Pentagon until a few minutes later. Within minutes, all US air traffic
was grounded for an indeterminate period, so it was not clear if we
would be able to fly to Lisbon for the world championship. A couple of
US 505 sailors e-mailed me to ask if the world championship would be
postponed, but it did not seem right to alter arrangements for the non
US sailors who were not as affected. It also was not at all clear that
a short delay would result in significantly better travel prospects for
the US teams, and we had no idea if the club could tolerate a delay,
either. I did check with other members of the 505 Class Executive
Committee and they had the same view. In the end three-and-a-half US
teams were unable or unwilling to go to Portugal. I lost my crew on the
Friday September 14th before I left. Steve Sparkman called me to tell me
that his leave had been cancelled, as had leave for most policemen in
the USA. I immediately sent an e-mail to the 505world list explaining
that I needed a crew, and decided to go to Portugal anyway, and hope for
the best. I had two people, Curtis Hartman, and Steve Lovshin, who
indicated their interest on Monday the 17th (the day I flew out) via
e-mail, but I had to leave for the airport before we could come to
a conclusion. Despite warnings for very heavy airport security I made it
through the ticket counter line in plenty of time.  However, the ticket
counter line did cause me some problems! Unfortunately, neither my
mainsail box nor my centreboard-and-rudder box would fit on the 30-seat
puddle jumper plane to Newark. With the help of two great US Airways
ticket counter staff, I unstitched the battens, and folded the sail down
so it would fit in a garment bag; so much for having an uncreased sail
at the worlds! There was nothing that could be done with the blade box
– I was not keen to saw the blades into shorter pieces -- so the blades
and box were left in the care of one of the US Airways ticket counter
guys.

What a great start, no crew, folded main, no new high aspect ratio
foils! Fortunately the boat had an older set of foils with it. And to
think that I quit my job so I could do this!

Both BWI and Newark airports were near-deserted, with most flights
cancelled; apparently as no one wanted to fly. However, both my flights
were on as scheduled. The 30-seater puddle jumper flew with only three
passengers, the other two were moved from a cancelled flight, and the
757 from Newark to Lisbon was at least half empty. I had a three-seat
row to myself so slept rather better than usual on trans-Atlantic
flight. After flying to South Africa last year, the trip to Europe was
short and easy!

Once in Cascais, and before the locals has fixed the Internet connection
(it went down every night and could only be brought back up the
following afternoon by getting some of the local support staff to work
on it), Simon Lake let me use his laptop in his hotel room, and I was
able to confirm that Steve Lovshin could make it and that Curtis Hartman
was not coming. The following afternoon with working Internet
connectivity at the club, I was able to confirm that Steve Lovshin was
on his way. I arrived in Cascais on Tuesday morning, Steve was on
a plane Wednesday and arrived Thursday; amazing considering the
difficulties with air travel. His sailing gear bag took a day longer to
arrive.

The Clube Naval de Cascais is in an old clubhouse between the town of
Cascais and a new marina. The dates this world championship was held
were selected to mesh with the Clube Naval's plans to build a new
clubhouse. After the 505 class confirmed that the worlds would be at the
Clube Naval de Cascais and confirmed the dates, the Clube Naval's plans
changed, and the rebuild of the club house has been postponed. The
organisers erected a large tent at one end of the dinghy park. This tent
served for measurement, daily prize giving ceremonies, snacks and bar,
internet cafe, AGM venue and more. We only went into the club house
itself to use the showers and toilets. The success of the tent
reinforces the argument that we do not need a large yacht club to host
a 505 world championship, just a dinghy park, a large tent (with beer
available inside) and of course a Race Committee, jury, and measurers.
This tent was so good that we probably would have been happy to spend
many evenings in the tent, partying with our friends, except that the
club closed the tent, and the entire dinghy park area, down early in the
evening, each night. If they had kept it open, and had the bar staffed
all evening, they would have made a fortune.

While waiting for Steve to arrive I rigged 505s. Sane people show up at
a 505 world championship with one 505. I had three. Yes, I know I can
only race one at a time, but I had my new Rondar 505, 8776, and a very
old Rondar I bought used, 7080, delivered to the worlds as one of the
505 class’ objectives in going to Portugal was to get Portuguese sailors
to try the 505, and we had to have 505s for them to sail. The Western
Australians brought three extra boats, Paul Young provided another
nearly new Rondar. In the end, 7080 was not raced, but 8776 was. If you
think you can handle rigging three boats, imagine unrigging them all so
they can be loaded into the container on the last day. Understandably,
the Portuguese team racing 8776 had questions from time to time; the
more boats you have at a world championship, the more time you spend on
them.

The World Championship This was probably the worst 505 World
championship I have been to, far below the standard of Mount’s Bay,
Townsville and Gilleleje. The club did not seem particularly motivated
to run an excellent event, and somehow the class and the club got into
somewhat of an adversarial relationship. This may simply have been the
club not knowing what the 505 class was all about and what we wanted, as
there are no 505 sailors at the club, or anywhere in Portugal. As 505
class president I was drawn in, meeting with the Race Committee (along
with class secretary Chris Thorne and another member of the executive,
Rob Napier) trying to work things out with them; I don’t think we
accomplished much. Indeed Rob and I tried to find alternative launching
ramps within the club and at an adjacent marina, and only succeeded in
pissing off – their words – the club. They had good marks and great
powerboats in sufficient numbers, but we could only use one concrete
launching ramp, at the end of a narrow apex of the triangle where the
boats were kept on their trolleys. I don’t think one could have designed
a better bottleneck! Apparently the club had configured the space
differently for other major dinghy events, but had not thought to do so
for the 505 worlds.  Everyone complains when we race in light winds, and
    everyone would have been happier with some better breeze, but the RC
    did make some strange decisions, breeze notwithstanding.

There were two racing areas, with A being a short sail out of the
harbour amongst some anchored ships, and B being a long sail up the
coast. The RC flew code flag B from a flagpole in the launching area
when they wanted us to go to area B. They also had sign out and sign in
sheets, which initially were only made available at 10:00AM, for a 12:00
start. No one could launch before the sign in sheets were available, or
before they knew which direction to sail in. It took rather longer than
one hour to launch all the 505s, and a good hour to sail out to the
course – you do the arithmetic.


Thomas Moss with the World's smallest 505 rudder	Bergstrom/Moss
Cummulus mast at measurement	Bergstrom/Moss 505 at measurement

Steve arrived on day two of the pre-worlds, so we missed the first day
and only race of the pre worlds, as they only managed to get one race
completed in light air and big swells. We did not launch on the second
day as there was no wind. Steve and I went out for a practice sail on
the afternoon of the third (measurement) day. Not much wind, and HUGE
swells reminiscent of Durban. Not a good place to be if you have
a queasy stomach!

Measurement Our International Measurer, Don O'Donnell, worked very hard
to get all 505s through measurement. Some were measured during the
pre-worlds, but a number had to be measured on the assigned measurement
day between the pre-worlds and the worlds. The event organizers had set
up a huge tent, one end of which was reserved for measurement. This
worked well, and points out that a large tent is probably more useful
than a large clubhouse, for a 505 World Championship. The club provided
people to work with Don, and a number of 505 sailors chipped in to help
on measurememnt. Thank you to all of you.  Race 1 A course. After
a postponement while waiting for the wind to settle, there was a wind
shift before the starting signal for the first race that the RC did not
notice or chose to ignore. We gated at 4 minutes, starting just as the
horn signaling that the gate launch was releasing the rabbit and going
to drift was sounded, and eventually reached into the weather mark. We
had excellent speed and rolled a bunch of boats doing this, but also
noticed that Swedes Johan Molund/Johan Barnes ahead and to leeward was
going better upwind than we were. Teams that gated at 3 minutes made it
to the weather mark without tacking. Early on while sailing the first
windward leg, I was certain that the mark we were looking at was not the
windward mark, being far too low and far too close to be the real
windward mark, but Steve Lovshin kept looking and saw the offset mark,
so we finally bore off to it. A number of good teams had horrible first
beats and some were not able to recover. Anyone who tacked to port was
done (unless they were amongst the very first to gate). We were about
8th at the first mark (being lucky) and would drop Pinnell/Hancock and
Payne/Masterman downwind but then pass them again upwind (more pressure
to the left), so more or less held our position until the last run to
the finish in dying (many would say dead) breeze where we dropped to
13th. Not a fun race for us, and worse for most others. Some teams were
unable to finish within the time limit as they were running downwind in
a lighter and lighter breeze, against the current. At least we did not
have to do a second race in those conditions on that day.  Race
2 B course. The next day a number of teams – including us – were late
for the start. We were all in line, dressed, ready to launch, eager to
get going, but those at the end of the line simply did not get into the
water early enough to make the start, as it took too long to launch all
the 505s. Four teams filed requests for redress, which were granted by
the International Jury, they were awarded average points for all their
races including their drop. Though we started late, we worked our way
through the fleet up to about 25th, which turned out to be one of our
better races, even though we took a five-point penalty for not signing
out, and were scored for 30th place. Getting back into the fleet was
easier to do in the rather light air than it would have been in a couple
more knots of pressure. We did not file for redress, as I suspected we
might want to keep the 25th, and I did not want to have a class officer
requesting redress due an action by the race committee.  The top three
in this race swapped places around the course, while everyone else
played “snakes and ladders” losing 6 places on one leg and gaining 10 on
the next.

Check out the comeback 8780, Brett Van Munster/Geoff Lange, pulled off
in this race.

Race 2-7 were similar in that it became clear that you had to go hard
right towards the shore on many of the windward legs. Rabbits won races
4, 6 and 7, and the only race in which the rabbit did not do better than
its tenth place finish in the previous race was race 2, where the rabbit
finished 11th.

Race 3 I was one of the first people at the club each morning, so go to
see other early arrivers move their boats into line and then leave to do
other things, blocking everyone else. I asked them to only put their
boats in line once they were ready, and then spent over an hour at the
top of the launching ramp trying to organize launching, while Steve
dragged the boat up the line, inch by inch, by himself. The Clube Naval
de Cascais also provided some people to bring trolleys back up the ramp
and keep them out of the way of launching boats. Launching went slightly
better, but still took well over an hour.B Course. This was not as crazy
as race 2, with less snakes and ladders. One of the better performances
was by Ebbe Rosen/Olle Wenrup who rounded the first mark 14th and
finished 5th. Bergstrom/Moss finished 10th and so arranged to be the
rabbit for race 4.  Race 4 B Course. Bergstrom/Moss, the rabbit, led at
every mark to take the win. Barney Harris/Clayton James were second at
every mark for second. Danny Thompson/Andy Zinn fell from 7th to 10th on
the last beat, setting themselves up to be the rabbit for race 5.  Race
5 After seeing something of a return to confusion at the launching ramp
while launching for Race 4, I again spent about an hour at the top of
the launching ramp trying to keep some semblance of organization, so we
could all launch and race.  B Course. This race was particularly shifty
and puffy and the graph of position by mark was amazing as teams could
gain 14 boats on one leg and lose 16 on the next.  Hunger/Jess led at
the first mark, fell to 5th at the gybe mark, and then pulled up late in
the race to win. Ebbe Rosen/Olle Wenrup finished 10th and used that to
good effect in race 6. The rabbit for the fifth race, Thompson/Zinn,
rounded the first mark 5th, got as high as 2nd, and finished 4th. We
were never in the top 25 or 30 that were recorded at each mark, but came
from well back to be up with Harris/James and passing Amthor/Smith to
finish 49th, which ended up being our drop race.

Race 6 B Course. Rosen/Wenrup, the pathfinders led at every mark to take
the win. Hunger/Jess were 2nd. Pinnell/Hancock were 10th so they had
their turn at rabbit in race 7. We were 29th at the weather mark and
managed to get down to 38th at the leeward mark and 40th at the second
windward mark, 39th at the gybe and second leeward narks before climbing
steadily up to 30th. This is probably the race where we gybed at the
offset mark and sailed through the hole created by a wall of
505s-with-spinnakers reaching down the offset leg. Our performance was
mirrored by the Cram brothers who rounded the first windward mark 14th,
climbed to 10th, which they held for several legs, and then fell to 19th
at the finish. Bergstrom/Moss rounded the first mark 6th, fell to 14th
on the run, and then clawed back up to 11th at the finish.
Pinnell/Hancock got the 10th place finish, dropping from 9th at the last
mark.  Race 7 B Course. We sat on shore until 3:00PM as there was no
wind and lots of warm sunshine, and then heard a horn. We thought the RC
had finally seen reason and was letting us off for the day, but no, they
wanted us to launch and race! The result was a start after 4:00PM and
a light air race that the leaders finished shortly before dark. On the
first start attempt most of the fleet was upwind of the rabbit’s path as
they were knocked, and the start had to be recalled. After several races
of trying to be conservative and gating earlier hoping for clearer air,
but then unable to get to the right, we just jammed into the crowd at
the four minute gate point and emerged from the melee with a good start
and clear air. As soon as the boat on our hip tacked—within 30 seconds
of gating -- we went to port and joined the drag race for the right
corner from a close-to-the-lead position. Pinnell and Hancock, the
pathfinder, sailed all the way to the corner and then some.
Bergstrom/Moss who were ahead and to leeward of us tacked rather below
Pinnell/Hancock’s line. Barney Harris/Clayton James, who were on our
weather hip, tacked after Bergstrom but did not go as far as
Pinnell/Hancock. We went further in, looking for clear air, and not
being slammed on as we came into the mark (OK, I was being greedy and
hoping for more pressure above the layline, too). It became apparent
that Pinnell/Hancock had overstood by enough that Krister/Thomas slipped
through into the lead at the mark, while we gave up distance we didn’t
need to and rounded about 6th or so, with Team Weasel close behind.
Krister/Thomas gybe set at the offset mark while Pinnell/Hancock kept
going and were soon ahead. Team Weasel got into more pressure, passing
us and holding on to fourth in the race. At one point the oldest boat in
the fleet – Team Weasel -- was reeling in Krister down a run, with
Krister looking over his shoulder wondering what to do about it.
Krister/Thomas held second for most of the race until Hamlin/Martin
ground them down on a run. We passed, lost and passed Harris/Clayton and
passed and lost Danny Thompson/Andy Zinn, and then lost Andy Beckman/Ben
Benjamin when they went furthest left down the run and came out to the
leeward mark in a little more pressure. Hunger/Jess finished one place
behind us, which sealed up the world championship win for them.  There
was no wind at all on the way in. We sailed the first little bit and
then rocked the boat the last two miles or so. We got back to shore just
before dark, the second or third 505 back (we are better rockers than
sailors!). The bulk of the fleet returned after dark. I spent some time
in the water at the bottom of the ramp catching boats and helping people
get their boats onto their trolleys. This turned out to be the last
race.

The next (last) day we launched for racing in a great planing-upwind
breeze that lightened before the start. We had some fog and a lull on
the first beat and then were amazed to find the race called at the
leeward mark, as the fog cleared a little. We all sailed in as requested
and then sat on shore while waiting to see if the RC would send us out
again. Eventually they ran out of time and the fleet started de-rigging,
so they could load the containers. In the meantime competitors who had
a lot to gain or a lot to lose by the running of this last race were
busy lobbying the regatta office and the class president (the PRO was
nowhere to be found) saying there absolutely had to be another race, or
there absolutely could not be another race, depending on their point of
view. Everyone else was asking me what was going on, and without any
statement from the Race Committee I had no idea.

Most of us had determined that they could not get a race off before the
time limit, and therefore had started derigging by the time the RC
formally called off an attempt at a last race. Some local workmen had
started digging a trench across the road we used to get our boats to the
containers, but fortunately work was progressing slowly enough that we
were still able to wheel the boats from the club to the containers.
Steve Lovshin and I spent some busy hours derigging three 505s, while
I also tried to deal with Portuguese customs. All three of my boats were
returning in different containers than they arrived in. The next effect
from the Portuguese customs perspective was nil, as 105 505s arrived,
and 105 505s would leave, but they wanted to account for each boat, and
required paperwork. For added enjoyment, it had started to rain, so the
area adjacent to the containers quickly became a sea of mud. The prize
presentation had been moved up as we were off the water early, but was
then moved back part way as it became clear that the container loading
would not be completed in time. I was still wearing my wetsuit and
sailing boots half an hour before the rescheduled prize presentation, so
disappeared to shower and change. Apparently all my boats were
eventually packed and loaded; I’ll have to take people’s word on this.

The PRO told me afterwards that they had abandoned the last race as they
had been concerned about the oldest and youngest competitors. This was
completely ridiculous in my opinion, but I didn’t bother to tell him
that, as it had been merely the last in a series of poor decisions by
the RC. Other poor decisions included running several races too close to
shore such that the right corner was heavily favoured and the race
a parade. Once competitors figured this out, there would be a long
string of boats over-standing the weather mark and close reaching in.
Not the sort of championship racing the class expects. This was also not
a great event to be 505 Class President at, I couldn’t walk through the
dinghy park without several people stopping me to discuss various
issues, and 505 sailors assumed I had some influence with the Race
Committee which was not the case. I did make it through a couple of
short speeches and the Annual General Meeting, apparently without making
a complete fool of myself.

The 505 Class President making speeches	Presenting an award to the Clube
Naval de Cascais	John Bagshaw and friends


The Cram boys under 21 Champions	Sandra and Mark Barber the couples
champions	Simon Payne/Bill Masterman 8th


Brett van Munster/Geoff Lange 7th	Howard Hamlin/Mike Martin 5th	Andy
Zinn/Danny Thompson 4th


Tim Hancock/Ian Pinnell 2nd


Worthy Champions In conditions where virtually all the top teams
faltered in some races, Wolfgang Hunger and Holger Jess sailed
a brilliant series and sealed up the win on the penultimate day. Their
throwout was a tenth place, and they were also the top ranked team
counting all races. They are very worthy International 505 World
Champions. This world championship was a triumph for Holger and the
German 505 fleet in many ways. The second placed German team was 6th, so
Germans not only won, they demonstrated real depth, too. Before Holger
did much of the work resulting in Germany being the top 505 country,
Germans did not make the top 25, and they did not turn out in large
numbers at worlds. Here they were one of the largest teams and finished
1st and 6th. Both Wolfgang and Holger made gracious speeches at the
prize presentation ceremony. Wolfgang recalled racing 470s at Cascais
years ago and learning from that experience. Holger paid tribute to
Krister Bergstrom, who was standing next to him on the 3rd place podium,
and spoke of crewing for Krister earlier this year and learning a great
deal as Krister had no secrets and kept nothing from him.  MACS Shipping
Sponsorship Without Dietrich Scheder-Bieschin, whose company provided
free shipping, this would have been a much smaller worlds fleet. This
was the first time the 505 class had gone to a venue and a country
without 505s, and only the MACs shipping sponsorship allowed such
a large turnout at the event. Dietrich also raced a really good series
and finished 6th!Thank You MACs! Thank you Dietrich!  Results (Copied
from event web site with permission from myskipper.com) Good Memories
OK, enough about the event. Next year the world championship is in Perth
Australia, it is going to blow, we are going to have the new long luff
spinnakers, and we are going to have a wonderful time (and my term as
President will be up and I can better focus on 505 racing, afterwards).
The part of Portugal I saw was dry, though that might simply be due to
the season. There were no overweight people, and many I saw were very
good looking. However every time I saw a good-looking young woman (just
about every young woman in Cascais!), she would light up a cigarette!
Too bad.

The coastline I saw close to Cascais was spectacular! A rock cliff up to
a low plateau; what a place to live. Portuguese is different enough from
Spanish (or French or Italian) that I could not understand any of it.
The sounds are in some cases similar to Russian. Though Portugal is not
a wealthy country, I did see signs of some wealth at the club or driving
through town , and no signs of real poverty.

Cascais was beautiful, with lots of restaurants, good food, and some
great pubs. Several of the restaurants were in a small open square close
to O’Neill’s and several of the hotels and B&Bs where sailors were
staying; anytime in the evening you walked through there one would see
several tables of 505 sailors enjoying dinner together, and you could
simply pull up a chair and join them. Locals selling sunglasses or roses
would offer their wares, and a shoeshiner kept himself occupied working
through the crowds in the square.

All competitors were in walking or cycling distance of the club. We all
had to get to the club fairly early, as with only one launching ramp
there was a large queue and a very long wait. Even with the first
warning signal scheduled for noon, one had to be at the club by 9AM, and
have the boat partly rigged and in line, and be dressed ready for
sailing, shortly afterwards. We made up for this by partying into the
early hours of the morning.

A band playing in one of the sqares	The local patron saint?


The 505ers initially adopted O’Neill’s Irish Pub – not the least bit
Portuguese – and were there most evenings. Several of the boys were
thrown out for singing – imagine, 505 sailors singing! -- on one of the
last evenings so activities moved to another pub up the street which was
less crowded and where they let us sing. I don’t think the staff at
O’Neill’s had quite understood how much money 505 sailors were spending
there. Besides, who wants to hear the guitar player or the sound system
when we can sing along with Richard Berry. After the containers were
packed and the prizes handed out and the speeches made, many competitors
spent the last evening in the second pub, singing, laughing, telling
stories and hanging out with friends. Several competitors had early
morning flights out of Lisbon and were determined to keep partying until
it was time to take at taxi to the airport. Others had no place to sleep
now that the boats had been loaded in the containers, depriving them of
their near-club dry-roof digs. Meanwhile, it was pouring rain (the rain
had started just as we began container loading, and became much heavier
during the evening), so several others stayed in the bar and partied
rather than walk back to their hotels in the rain.

How We Did The first race and the last race were our best finishes. The
25th when we were late for the start was also one of our better results.
Our throwout was a 49th. I think we were frequently either blowing the
start, or going the wrong way up the first beat. In several races we
rounded the first mark well back and then fought our way back up into
the twenties. At least once we came from so far back that several
competitors commented on our amazing recovery. I do recall one race
where we were a little further up at the windward and offset marks, but
I called for a gybe at the offset mark and we sailed into a large hole
created by the wall of boats sailing the offset leg (on which everyone
carried a spinnaker). We lost a lot of boats on that run.  Anyhow, Steve
Lovshin did a terrific job with his end of the boat, and mostly ignored
me when I went into meltdown at the back. He was racing a boat he had
only seen before, rigged quite differently from what he was used to, and
racing with a skipper who wanted a rather different division of
responsibility than Steve was used to.

Most of the time our speed was quite good, very good at times, and
suddenly off the pace at other times. A few times we had hooked large
clumps of weed or large jellyfish, but other times we were slow without
knowing why. Downwind the “clunk in the trunk” (centreboard all the way
up so that slot gaskets close smooth and fair with the bottom) worked
well for us, and we had very good speed with the North medium kite when
we could keep our air clear and not sail into large holes. It was
sometimes too light to go dead-down-wind. Upwind we were able to hang
with Hamlin/Martin on the one beat we were close to them, we actually
passed them in a puff, though later in the beat they got us on a shift,
and on another occasion were hanging with other top finishers like
Thompson/Zinn and Molund/Barnes, when all-of-a-sudden we’d be dogging it
and people would be rolling us. A bigger problem is that we simply did
not go the right way often enough and the regatta was all about going
the right way.

The new North main design seemed quicker than the North CE2+. I believe
Barney and Clayton would agree as their finishes improved dramatically
after they retrieved the 3DL mainsail; it was held up in baggage at the
airport, and missed a couple of races.

---------------------

https://www.sandiego505.com/WeaselWorlds2001.htm

Team Weasel Goes to the Worlds
Bill Jenkins
October, 2001

The day before the 505 World Championships last month in Cascais,
Portugal, Dan Merino and I finally sailed our boat out into the Atlantic
Ocean beneath the turrets and towers of a thousand years worth of
castles, forts, and palaces.  Three years ago, Dan and I were sailing
buddies who occasionally raced his old 505 in the handicap fleet on
Mission Bay. A trip to Spain together showed us how much fun that part
of the world could be, and when we saw that the 505 World Championships
would be in Portugal in 2001, it seemed natural that we make a run at
it. Dan found a boat hiding out in the garages of San Diego that turned
out to be one of the first built with modern materials and techniques.
It was still very stiff and dry, but required all the systems to be
modernized and lightened.

Besides fixing up the boat, we went to work to improve our sailing
technique. As soon as we started travelling, all illusions were lost as
to where we stood skill-wise. Some of the best 505 sailors in the world
live on the West Coast. So we ramped up our travel schedule to include
all the regional and national regattas possible, shifted our training
area from Mission Bay to South San Diego Bay, and joined the 2001
edition of Team Tuesday.

Team Tuesday consists of the most committed 505 sailors in Southern
California. They meet each Tuesday evening at Alamitos Bay Yacht Club
for intensive training and debriefing sessions with Jay Glaser as the
coach. The program was credited with propelling Mike Martin and Howie
Hamlin to their Worlds victory in 1999 and separate standings of 2nd and
3rd in 2000. For Dan and me, with jobs, families, and a weekly commute
between San Diego and Long Beach, it was a grueling experience. But we
stuck it out until August when we finally loaded the boat for Portugal.
Of course, we learned a huge amount about making the boat go fast and
made some great friendships with people who really understand 505's and
are at the top of the class.

The Worlds themselves were a lot of fun, but not exactly in the way
I expected. The wind, which had been blowing 20+ knots for months, shut
off the week before the regatta started. According to the locals, that
happens every year after the second week of September. They couldn't
figure out why we had scheduled our regatta then. So we never raced in
more than 10 knots, and sailed more than one race in the rain. As
a result, the racing was more tactical than usual, and still interesting
for the drivers. But the crews found themselves alternately crouching
under the boom vang or staring up at a sagging spinnaker. Not that any
of them ever complained…

On the other hand, the Portuguese people, and especially the people
running the regatta, are very friendly. And the setting was very
beautiful and historic. We spend a lot of time in the evenings wandering
the town just looking around. But the highlight of the regatta was
meeting all the other sailors. There were 105 teams from 12 countries,
including several past champions and industry professionals. It was
great fun to walk into a bar full of carousing sailors and swap stories
and sing songs until late at night.

The main difference between sailing against 100 other boats and 10 is
how many are ready to pass you as soon as you make a mistake.
Fortunately all the races began with gate starts, so that part wasn't
too hectic. We found that if we kept our wind clear and stayed more or
less in phase with the shifts, we'd come to the weather mark around
30th. From there, whether we moved up or down depended almost entirely
on our attitude and concentration. And we managed to do both in about
equal numbers. The biggest thrill was taking fourth in the last race,
duking it out with our teammates, Howie and Mike, and five-time champion
Krister Bergstrom.

In the end, Wolfgang Hunger and Holger Jess won the regatta: the first
victory for a German team. Dan and I placed 34th, well above our goal of
top half, and Team Tuesday took 3 of the top ten positions. Go to the
regatta web site for all the details.

There are some great photos right here on this site as well.

---------------------

94 Teams -- so far -- Expected for 2001 International 505 World Championship in Cascais, Portugal
Dear 505 sailors,

The entry list for the upcoming International 505 World Championship is
on the world championship web site at URL:
http://www.myskipper.com/505wc/participantes/participantes.asp has been
recently updated. Thanks to Simon Lake for pointing this out to me
(there was another update earlier today, but this latest update added
several more teams).

We currently have 94 entries listed: (WOW!!!)

Australia	13
Denmark	3
Finland	2
France	6
Germany	18
Ireland	3
Portugal	5
South Africa	3
Sweden	5
Great Britain	19
USA	17
TOTAL	94

There are probably additional entries as we know of British (6), US (3)
and another French entry that are not yet included in the list. That
would bring the total to 104!!

I believe this is an excellent turnout, especially considering that this
world championship is being held in a country that does not (yet!) have
an active 505 fleet!

If you are going to this world championship, please check if you are
included on the entry list at URL:
http://www.myskipper.com/505wc/participantes/participantes.asp If you
are not, you may wish to contact the Clube Naval de Cascais regarding
your entry (or it may simply not have made it to the web list yet).

If you are not listed, please e-mail me so I can keep my own tally;
I would like to write and distribute a press release, and would like to
have complete numbers to use in it.

See you in Cascais!

Alexander "Ali" Meller
President, International 505 Class Yacht Racing Association

---------------------

95 TEAMS FROM 11 COUNTRIES PRE-REGISTERED FOR 46th INTERNATIONAL 505 WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP

CASCAIS PORTUGAL - More than 95 teams will compete in September at the
505 World Championships in Cascais, Portugal, event organizers announced
today. The 46th running of the 505 Worlds is slated for Sept. 21-28,
following a 2-day pre-worlds warm-up event Sept. 19-20.  The regatta is
attracting top competitors from around the globe, including teams from
Australia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, South Africa,
Sweden, Great Britain, USA and Portugal. Key teams to watch are:


- Five time 505 World Champion Krister Bergstrom from Sweden, returning
  with crew Thomas Moss to defend their 2000 World Championship
- 1999 World and 2001 North American Champions Howard Hamlin and Mike
  Martin of the USA are back together after each steering a 505 for the
  2000 season
- Past 470 World Champion Dr. Wolfgang Hunger and crew Holger Jess of Germany
- Past Fireball World Champion and multi-time 505 UK Champion Ian Pinnell of Great Britain
- Perennial French National Champion Philippe Boite
- Olympian (in Laser) Nick Adamson of the USA
- Morgan Larson of the USA is also expected, but is not yet registered

The event web site at URL: http://www.myskipper.com/505wc/index.asp
includes a list of all pre-registered competitors. This site will have
daily reports, latest news, and photos during the event. This is the
first time the 505 World Championship has been held in Portugal,
a country that has until now, not had an active 505 fleet.

With over 1200 members in 20 countries, the International 505 class is
the largest and most active two-person high performance dinghy class in
the world, providing the highest level of non-Olympic racing available.
Despite its exceptional performance, the 505 is relatively easy to sail,
but a challenge to sail well! It is raced by Olympic medallists and club
sailors, men and women, juniors and seniors, on lakes and on oceans, in
drifters and in 35+ knots. Many of the best-known names in International
Sailing have raced, or currently race 505s.

---------------------

NINETEEN US TEAMS TO CONTEST INTERNATIONAL 505 WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP IN CASCAIS PORTUGAL

CASCAIS PORTUGAL - The largest US team in years will contest the
International 505 World Championship in Cascais Portugal at the 46th 505
World Championship, September 21-28, following a 2-day pre-worlds
warm-up event September 19-20.

According to Alexander Meller, president of the International 505 Class
Yacht Racing Association, while there have been larger turnouts at 505
worlds held in North America, no one can remember a team this large
going to a worlds outside North America.

This US team is not just large, it is also very strong, with several US
entries capable of winning worlds races and perhaps the world
championship. Members of the US team include:

Howard Hamlin/Mike Martin - after a year of each steering a 505 (and
finishing 2nd and 3rd at the 2000 International 505 World Championship)
the 1999 505 World Championship team is back together looking for their
second 505 world championship. They won every race but one at the recent
North American Championship -- racing their backup boat as all West
Coast Worlds participants had already shipped their boats to Portugal --
and have been practicing with other members of "Team Tuesday" every
Tuesday evening. Howard and Mike are 2/3 of the US' only Australian 18
footer team, and have been very successful in that class as well.

Andy Beeckman/Ben Benjamin - The "young bucks" are another "Team
Tuesday" team practicing with Hamlin/Martin, and were second at the 1999
World Championship and sixth at the 2000 World Championship.

Nick Adamson/Alan Norman - Nick represented the US at the Atlanta
Olympic Games in the Laser class. He has been racing 505s with Alan
Norman since moving to the San Francisco Bay area several years ago.
Nick and Alan are frequently the fastest West Coast team upwind. With
the long beats on 505 worlds courses their upwind speed -- and
experience -- could serve them very well.

Jeff Miller/Jeff Nelson - While Jeff Miller has not been racing every
505 world championship over the years, he has a long standing habit of
finishing very near the top when he does. This year he has teamed up
with a member of "Team Tuesday", Jeff Nelson, for the world
championship. With 25+ years of 505 experience, having won 505 world
championship races, and finishing near the top of the fleet many times
before, and now with a top crew, this new team could do very well.

Dan Thompson/Andy Zinn - Dan Thompson was 3rd at the 1979 505 World
Championship. After being out of the 505 class for many years, raising
kids and racing Etchells (he won the Etchells North American
championship), Dan returned to the 505 class in 1997 and teamed up with
Andy Zinn. They recently bought a new Waterat 505, relegating their 21
year old Hamlin to backup status, and have been frequently faster than
anyone else in "Team Tuesday" in their practice sessions and West Coast
regattas. With the "Team Tuesday" experience and a new boat, this could
be their year.

Ryan Cox/Carl Smit - Ryan was college sailor of the year 1995 (one of
several recent college sailors of the year racing 505s), and has raced
with Carl Smit (they were both Navy SEALs) since 1998. Since leaving the
navy they have had more opportunities to practice and have been racing
against "Team Tuesday", upping their game. This is a very strong, fit
team; watch them if it gets windy for several days.

Barney Harris/Clayton James - Though a new team this year, each member
has three+ years experience in 505s. Barney also races Albacores and has
won all of the Canadian Albacore championship, US Albacore Championship
and North American Albacore Championship multiple times, recently, as
well as several near misses at the Albacore International Championship.

Morgan Larson/Steve Bourdow - This could be the 19th US team if their
brand new 505, completed after the containers were shipped, makes it to
Cascais in time. Apparently it is being shipped by air to make the
event. Morgan recently teamed up with Trevor Baylis in a borrowed 505
and won the Pacific Coast Championship, so getting up the 505 learning
curve does not seem to be a problem for him. With limited experience
racing a 505 together, but very strong sailing backgrounds, and Steve's
top level 505 experience last year racing with Mike Martin (finishing
second at the 2000 World Championship), this team should be able to get
around the race course just fine.  "Team Tuesday", based in Long Beach,
is probably the strongest 505 fleet in the world at this time. There
could easily be five "Team Tuesday" teams in the top ten at the World
Championship. The top three teams within “Team Tuesday” report they are
close to equal in speed. But they have very strong competition to deal
with, including five time 505 World Champion, Krister Bergstrom of
Sweden, who most recently won the 2000 World Championship with Thomas
Moss. Team GBR is sending 23 teams to this worlds, including past
Enterprise and Fireball World Champion Ian Pinnell, racing with 1993 505
World Championship crew Tim Hancock. Pinnell has won virtually every
major European 505 event held in Europe, but has not yet won a 505
worlds. Other top teams capable of winning the 2001 505 world
championship come from Germany, England, Sweden, Australia, Denmark, and
France. So far 105 teams from twelve countries are registered. For
a list of all entrants check URL:
http://www.myskipper.com/505wc/participantes/participantes.asp More
information about the 2001 505 World Championship is available at the
event web site at URL: http://www.myskipper.com/505wc/index.asp.

More information about the International 505 Class is available at the
International 505 web site at URL: http://www.int505.org.



