505 Worlds in Marstrand − a victory for GKSS

The Int.Dragon sailors had barely packed up their boats and crews, and
the regatta officials had barely exhaled before the next group of
expectant sailors and new, alert and fresh officials took over Marstrand
and the Korvetten. It was time for the 505 World Championship.

By Gudrun Hildemar previously published in Seglarbladet, GKSS member
bulletin ( translation of the original text in Swedish )

After a thrilling final settlement, Krister Bergström and Per-Anders
Hallberg surfed home the gold to Sweden and GKSS. It was the fourth gold
medal for Krister, who last won the World Cup in 1989, even then with
Per-Anders in the trapeze. Photo: Dan Ljungsvik

The championships were preceded by the Pre-Worlds/International Swedish
Championship which was inaugurated on Friday July 26th. The inauguration
was held in Korvetten's garden, where GKSS chairman Gunne Dellborg and
competition leader Bengt Grävare gave a welcome speech. 68 boats
participated in the open Swedish Championships. Before the WC, 15 were
added so that the starting field then consisted of 83 boats.

The English "Swedish champion"

Monday's two races were canceled due to non-existent wind, but with four
races completed so far, a winner could still be crowned. The winner and
"Swedish champion" were the Englishmen Ian Pinnell/Mark Darling. These
two would later prove to be one of the worst competitors to our Swedish
favorites in the battle for the World Cup gold. We found the best Swedes
in ninth place: Stockholmers Ebbe Rosén and Olle Wenrup. Our main
favorites from GKSS were found in 12th place: Kalle Nilsson/Frank Bach
on 32nd place. Krister Bergström who sailed with his brother Rasmus
during the Swedish Championships. Due to trouble with, among other
things, the big event, the brothers could not complete any of the races
on Sunday and this of course reduced the result.

Marstrand's harbor is growing

For the first time, the Marstrandsverken shipyard area was used as
a parking place for the boats. It worked well and with three ramps it
was also quick to get the boats in the water in the mornings. Press
Office was also on the Koön side and this was also a premiere. It worked
very smoothly; the journalists who came did not have to take the ferry
over, but press boats were on hand just outside the Press Office, which
was located in FEAB's old office premises.

A wonderful bunch

The atmosphere among the 505 sailors is relaxed and you can feel the
spirit of a friend even as an outsider. Everyone shares their trim
solutions and ideas instead of hiding them from each other. It is
a wonderful group that is very easy to have and do with and fun to work
with. For me as a novice in the function, it was a positive experience
and I am happy to be an regatta official supporter again. When you have
fun when you work, you can make a little extra effort and nothing feels
impossible.

Party with happy speeches

Tuesday and Wednesday were measurement days and on Wednesday evening,
July 31, it was the inauguration of the World Cup at the fortress,
solemn and grandiose, worthy of a World Cup, with, among other things,
guiding a man in a typical Carolingian uniform. Then it was dinner in
the ballroom. After a couple of formal welcome speeches by, among
others, the Swedish Sailing Federation's Erkki Persson, there was also
an opportunity for a representative from each participating country to
say a few chosen words. These were less strict and raised the mood
considerably and the slightly nervous speakers received good support
through happy shouts, laughter and applause. Most applause and whistles
were received by the Belgian representative, a cute blonde – one of the
few girls who participated.

When will the wind come?

Most days there was perfect spectator weather. Ie radiant sun, warm and
around 5 m/s. The sailors, on the other hand, wanted more wind. When the
weather report in the mornings was posted on the notice board in the
harbor, you could hear deep sighs from the sailors – no strong wind
today either... Of the 83 boats that participated in the WC, 18 were
Swedish. There were sailors from ten countries and the crews that were
considered the most interesting were Swedish, Danish, American and
Australian. Other participating nations were England, France, Germany,
Finland, Belgium and Switzerland.

Many candidates for the gold

The great Swedish hope was of course Krister Bergström – already
three-time world champion 1987-89 and his crew P-A Hallberg, who won
gold in 1989. Would this combination prove unbeatable even in Marstrand?
Kalle Nilsson/Frank Bach, the seniors in the class and with many fine
merits in their luggage would surely like to have a say in the game.
Like last year's gold medalists Jörgen Schönherr/Anders Kaempe from
Denmark. The USA had the victorious duo Howard Hamlin and Steve
Rosenberg and Australia several strong cards. Dean Blatchford, won the
Worlds in 1984 and this year he sails with his brother Todd, Terry
Kyrwood, world champion in 1983 who this time sails with Charles Spence.
Brothers Chris and Darren Nicholson were a third very good candidate for
the gold. Or would the Swedish Championship winners Pinnell/Darling also
take home the World Cup?

The World Cup's most bad luck

Some of the participants were already here in 1974, when the 505 world
championships took place in Marstrand last time. Those who did not
experience this themselves have at least heard of it. Then it is said
that "the five-oh's flew high over the Marstrands fjord", with various
more or less serious accidents as a result. This summer, most survived
some major injuries. A couple of rudder crashes were probably the worst
incidents. The worst affected were the Danes Kim Christensen/Sören
Overbeck. During the World Cup's first race, they were up in the lead,
but on the last reach came such a strong wave that the helmsman could
not parry it properly. The crew fell on him and the rudder came loose.
But not in the pin gudgeon but a large piece of the transom broke off.
There was no more sailing for these poor boys that day.

The Swedes took the lead

The first race was instead won by Krister Bergström and P-A Hallberg and
in second place Kalle Nilsson and Frank Bach. Double Swedish in the
lead. And double GKSS. Even after day two, there was a double Swedish
lead, but the order was the reverse: Kalle and Frank were first. This
race had been won by Schönherr/Kaempe who was now third. The Danes also
won the third race and took the lead. The fourth and fifth races were
won by Pinnell/Darling who now also came up in the lead and fought for
the first place. During these races it blew more than it has done
before, which benefited above all the English but also the Swedes.
Schönherr/Kaempe went best in light winds but also hanged on somewhat in
the slightly fresher breeze.

Exciting along to the final race

Before the sixth and final race, the excitement was at its peak. No less
than four boats had the opportunity to win. Would the victory go to one
of the Swedish crews Bergström/Hallberg and Nilsson/Bach or would the
Englishmen Pinnell/Darling or the Danes Schönherr/Kaempe win the medal?
How it would all end was still uncertain on the last beat and made the
whole thing extremely exciting. At this point, it was a battle between
Bergström/Hallberg and Pinnell/Darling. If the English won, the Swedes
could not get worse than third to win overall. Pinnell/Darling was first
while Krister and P-A were fifth for a long time. Many were the nails
    that were nervously bitten off at sea this day! Eventually, the
    Swedes managed to sail up to the second place that they retained in
    the finish, even though the English did everything to hold back the
    Swedes, so that the third and fourth would have time to driving them
    by. The gold was secured for Sweden.

Cajun party

On Sunday evening (the 4th), "social event managers" had arranged a nice
party at Strandverket. It was Cajun themed and jambalaya, ribs and
crayfish were served. Afterwards they drank Hurricane. A band played
Cajun inspired music that invited to long dances around Strandverket.
During the evening, various competitions were held which were part of
a pentathlon where each country was allowed to have a team.

Then came the wind

The reserve day did not need to be used. The award ceremony and closing
party were therefore held on Wednesday (August 7). Thursday was instead
used to try to restore Marstrand to what it was before the five-oh-five
sailors with officials took over and controlled the island for two
weeks. When I left Marstrand it started to get cloudy. The next day
I woke up to the noise of the trees. Wind with gale force was on its way
and it was the wind that the 505 sailors had been waiting in vain for
two weeks!


Kalle Nilsson and Frank Bach, GKSS. Photo: Dan Ljungsvik Kalle, a real
veteran in the 505 class, and Frank had a chance to the gold before the
last race.

Terry Kyrwood and Charles Spence passing Ebbe Rosén and Olle Wenrup.
Photo: Dan Ljungsvik

Fighting faces on Krister Bergström and P-A Hallberg, world champions
this year in the 505 class.  Krister's fourth (!) World Cup gold. Photo:
Dan Ljungsvik


505 World Championship, August 1-8, 1991

--------------

Till början av sidan!

Five VM i Marstrand – en seger för GKSS Av Gudrun Hildemar

Knappt hade drakseglarna packat ihop båtar och besättningar, och knappt
hade funktionärerna pustat ut förrän nästa gäng förväntansfulla seglare
och nya, pigga och fräscha funktionärer intog Marstrand och Korvetten.
Det var dags för 505-VM.

Mästerskapen föregicks av För-VM/Internationellt SM som invigdes
fredagen den 26 juli. Invigningen hölls i Korvettens trädgård där GKSS
ordförande Gunne Dellborg och tävlingsledaren Bengt Grävare höll
välkomsttal. 68 båtar deltog under öppna SM. Inför VM:et tillkom 15 så
att startfältet då bestod av 83 båtar.

Engelsmännen "svensk mästare"

Måndagens två seglingar blev inställda på grund av obefintlig vind, men
med fyra seglingar genomförda så långt kunde ändå en vinnare koras.
Vinnare och "svenska mästare" blev engelsmännen Ian Pinnell/Mark
Darling. Dessa båda skulle senare visa sig vara en av de värsta
konkurrenterna till våra svenska favoriter i kampen om VM-guldet. Bästa
svenskar hittade vi på nionde plats: stockholmarna Ebbe Rosén och Olle
Wenrup. Våra främsta favoriter från GKSS återfanns på 12:e plats: Kalle
Nilsson/Frank Bach resp. 32:a plats: Krister Bergström som under SM:et
seglade med brorsan Rasmus. På grund av strul med bl a storfallet kunde
inte bröderna slutföra någon av seglingarna under söndagen och detta
drog givetvis ner resultatet.

Marstrands hamn växer

För första gången användes Marstrandsverkens varvsområde som
uppställningsplats för båtarna. Det fungerade bra och med tre ramper
gick det även fort att få båtarna i vattnet på mornarna. Press Office
fanns också på Koön-sidan och även detta var premiär. Det fungerade
mycket smidigt; de journalister som kom behövde inte ta sig över med
färjan utan pressbåtar fanns till hands alldeles utanför Press Office
som låg i FEAB:s gamla kontorslokaler.

Ett härligt gäng

Stämningen bland fiveseglarna är avslappnad och man kan känna
kompisandan även som utomstående. Den delar med sig av sina
trimlösningar och idéer i stället för att gömma dem för varandra. Det är
ett härligt gäng som är väldigt lätt att ha och göra med och roligt att
arbeta med. För mig som novis inom funktionärandet var det en positiv
erfarenhet och jag är gärna funktionär igen. När man har kul då man
arbetar kan man anstränga sig lite extra och ingenting känns omöjligt.

Fest med glada tal

Tisdag och onsdag var mätdagar och på onsdagskvällen den 31 juli var det
invigning av VM:et på fästningen, högtidligt och pampigt, värdigt ett
VM, med bl a guidning av en man i tidstypisk karolineruniform. Sen blev
det middag i festsalen. efter ett par formella välkomsttal av bl
a Svenska Seglarförbundets Erkki Persson, gavs det även tillfälle för en
representant från varje deltagande land att säga några valda ord. Dessa
var mindre strikta och höjde stämningen betydligt och de lite nervösa
talarna fick god support genom glada tillrop, skratt och applåder. Mest
applåder och busvisslingar fick Belgiens representant, en söt blondin
– en av de få tjejer som deltog.

När kommer vinden?

De flesta dagarna rådde perfekt åskådarväder. Dvs strålande sol, varmt
och kring 5 m/s. Seglarna däremot, önskade sig mer vind. Då
väderleksrapporten på mornarna sattes upp på anslagstavlan i hamnen
kunde man höra djupa suckar från seglarna – ingen hårdvind idag
heller... Av de 83 båtar som deltog i VM:et var 18 svenska. Det fanns
seglare med från tio länder och de besättningar som räknades som mest
intressanta var svenska, danska, amerikanska och australiensiska. Övriga
deltagande nationer var England, Frankrike, Tyskland, Finland, Belgien
och Schweiz.

Många kandidater till guldet

Det stora svenska hoppet var förstås Krister Bergström – redan trefaldig
världsmästare 1987-89 och hans gast P-A Hallberg, som var med och vann
guld 1989. Skulle denna kombination visa sig oslagbara även i Marstrand?
Kalle Nilsson/Frank Bach, seniorerna i klassen och med många fina
meriter i bagaget skulle säkert vilja ha ett ord med i leken. Liksom
förra årets guldmedaljörer Jörgen Schönherr/Anders Kaempe från Danmark.
USA hade den segersugna duon Howard Hamlin och Steve Rosenberg och
Australien flera starka kort. Dean Blatchford, vann VM 1984 och i år
seglade han med sin bror Todd, Terry Kyrwood, världsmästare 1983 som nu
seglar med Charles Spence. De två bröderna Chris och Darren Nicholson
var en tredje mycket duktig kandidat om guldet. Eller skulle SM-segrarna
Pinnell/Darling ta hem även VM?

VM:ets mesta otur

Några av deltagarna var med redan 1974, då five-VM gick i Marstrand
förra gången. De som inte själva var med och upplevde detta har
åtminstone hört talas om det. Då sas det att "fivarna flög högt över
Marstrandsfjorden", med diverse mer eller mindre allvarliga haverier som
följd. I sommar klarade sig de flesta från några större skador. Ett par
roderhaverier var väl de värsta incidenterna. Värst drabbade var
danskarna Kim Christensen/Sören Overbeck. Under VM:ets första segling
var de uppe i ledningen men på sista slören kom en så kraftig våg att
rorsmannen inte klarade av att parera den ordentligt. Gasten ramlade och
rodret lossnade. Men inte i fästet utan en stor bit av akterspegeln
bröts loss. Det blev inte mer seglat för dessa stackars gossar den
dagen.

Svenskarna tog ledningen

Första seglingen vanns i stället av Krister Bergström och P-A Hallberg
och på andra plats Kalle Nilsson och Frank Bach. Dubbelt svenskt
i ledningen. Och dubbelt GKSS. Även efter dag två var det dubbel svensk
ledning, men ordningen var den omvända: Kalle och Frank låg etta. Denna
segling hade vunnits av Schönherr/Kaempe som nu låg trea. Danskarna vann
även den tredje seglingen och gick upp i ledningen. Fjärde och femte
seglingarna vanns av Pinnell/Darling som nu även de kom upp i täten och
var med och slogs om förstaplatsen. Under dessa seglingar blåste det mer
än det gjort tidigare vilket gynnade framför allt engelsmännen men även
svenskarna. Schönherr/Kaempe gick bäst i lätt vind men hängde även med
någorlunda i den lite friskare brisen.

Spännande in i det sista

Inför den sjätte och sista seglingen var spänningen på topp. Inte mindre
än fyra båtar hade möjlighet att vinna. Skulle segern gå till någon av
de svenska besättningarna Bergström/Hallberg och Nilsson/Bach eller
skulle engelsmännen Pinnell/Darling eller danskarna Schönherr/Kaempe
kamma hem medaljen? Hur det hela skulle sluta var fortfarande ovisst på
sista kryssen och gjorde det hela oerhört spännande. Vid det här laget
var det en kamp mellan Bergström/Hallberg och Pinnell/Darling. Om
engelsmännen vann fick svenskarna inte komma sämre än trea för att vinna
totalt. Pinnell/Darling låg etta medan Krister och P-A länge låg femma.
Många var de naglar som nervöst blev avbitna på havet denna dag! Så
småningom lyckades svenskarna segla upp sig till den andreplats som de
behöll i mål, även om engelsmännen gjorde allt för att hålla tillbaka
svenskarna, så att trean och fyran skulle hinna segla om. Guldet var
säkrat för Sveriges del.

Cajunfest

På söndagskvällen (den 4:e) hade "social eventsansvariga" ordnat en
trevlig fest på Strandverket. Den var Cajun-tema och det bjöds bl a på
jambalaya, revbensspjäll och kräftor. Efteråt drack man Hurricane. Ett
band spelade Cajun-inspirerad musik som inbjöd till långdans runtom
i Strandverket. Under kvällens lopp hölls diverse tävlingar som ingick
i en femkamp där varje land fick ha ett lag.

Då kom vinden

Reservdagen behövde inte utnyttjas. Prisutdelning och avslutningsfest
lades därför på onsdagen (den 7:e aug). Torsdagen användes i stället
till att försöka återställa Marstrand till vad det varit innan
fiveseglare med funktionärer intagit och behärskat ön i två veckor. När
jag lämnade Marstrand började det molna på. Dan därpå vaknade jag av att
det susade i träden. Vind med kulingstyrka var på väg det var den vind
som fiveseglarna förgäves väntat på i två veckor!



Artikel i Segling Nr 7-91

Artiklar i GKSS Seglarbladet: 5O5-VM i Marstrand 1991 Den krokiga vägen
mot 5O5-VM Allround-styrka gav Bergström/Hallberg nytt VM-guld

Till början av sidan!


505 Sweden Archive Home

— Sv.505 Förbundet —

Uppdaterad 2020-12-14

