1997 Scottish Championship

The 1997 Scottish Championships were held over the weekend of 21/21st September
at Prestwick Sailing Club. The weekend was notable for a few things, the lack
of wind, the abundance of huge jellyfish with a magnetic attraction for 505 CBs
and Gordon McGeorge not winning every race in light weather!

Saturday racing was a bit of a lottery with runs turning into beats and vice
versa, reaches into beats and runs and then beats again......! The first race
was won by Neil Rosie and Alan Jeffrey, GBR 7653 just holding on as Gordon
McGeorge, GBR 8244 made a last beat "charge", closely followed by Colin Greer
and James Miller, GBR 7546. The second race started promisingly in a steadyish
breeze but this was somewhat short-lived as the wind started to swing wildly
again, once it settled it Graeme Busby and Graeme Greer, GBR 8123 got round the
leeward mark in first place and managed to hold on to win from Rosie/Jeffrey
with McGeorge/Russell again in very close attendance. The third race was again
a bit of a lottery with the final beat being a painfully slow run, Kenny
Manderson and John McDonald, GBR 7656 drifted quicker than most and stayed in
front from start to finish to win comfortably in the end. [Details of this race
are sketchy because I was drifting much slower due to the Jellyfish repeatedly
trying to screw my C/B] The boats got off the water about 18.45 in the evening
having gone on the water shortly after 12, it was a long and frustrating
afternoon.

The afternoon's frustrations were soon forgotten as a session rapidly
re-hydrating with beer meant that most other things were forgotten, like names,
places, dates, times, how to get back to the club etc. etc.

Sunday dawned Sunny, windless, and very hungover, a light easterly breeze
settled in and the third race got under way, McGeorge & Russell went left and
rounded first followed by Busby/Greer and Rosie/Jeffrey. Things looked
promising as the breeze remained constant for more than two rounds, however on
the second run became things became variable again and the run became a beat
and the beat a run, McGeorge/Russell held on to record their first win with
Rosie/Jeffrey in second, third place went to Clive R. Davis and Kenny Robertson,
GBR 8120, from the home club. The wind then shifted and settled in to make the
5th and final race the rirst race in steady wind all weekend. Going left up the
1st beat paid of as a slight shift mean the rest of the race became somewhat
processional, McGeorge /Russell rounded first and sailed away from everyone
showing some blistering upwind speed in the marginal trapeezing conditions,
Rosie/Jeffrey finished second with a new face in third, Alistair Barrie from
the home club sailing an elderly Parker to an excellent third place.

Graeme Busby
GBR 8123


