2003 Worlds Images

Updated 7 August, 2003

Text and captions by Alexander Meller and Elizabeth Thompson

Edited by Elizabeth Thompson

Thumbnails created (in an amazingly short time) by Ali Soylu. Thanks
also to Falko Braun, Nicholas Place and Andy Foster for volunteering.
Ali Soylu did them while I was still answering e-mails!

Elizabeth Thompson took on the water photos most of the days we were
racing. Most of her images are here. Click on the thumbnail to get
a full-size version.


These are pictures from day one of the three-day pre-worlds/Swedish
International Championship. There were two races each day. The
pre-worlds had generally light to medium winds with some wire running
and some sitting in the boat. Many German teams were not at the event as
they were racing an event in Germany, so we had a smaller and less
competitive fleet than we did at the worlds. Howard Hamlin/Peter Alarie
dominated the event with Danny Thompson/Andy Zinn second. Krister
Bergström/Johan Barne had some so-so races (Krister tends to use the
pre-worlds to experiment, as he has few opportunities to race against
other 505s), and Wolfgang Hunger/Holger Jess arrived in time to race
only the last two races.

July 25
We had managed to have the boat and sails measured ahead of time, so
after some boat work that took much longer than it should have, we had
the afternoon off. Elizabeth and I borrowed Anne Nelson's mountain bike
and went to Malmö. Two people and one bicycle mean that we were walking,
running, cycling, cycling double, on the way to Malmö, in Malmö and on
the way back. It is very easy to cycle here! The local Swedes all ride
older-looking road bicycles, frequently equipped with baskets, not road
racing bicycles or mountain bicycles. Anne Nelson's borrowed mountain
bike looked a little out of place. Most roads have bicycle lanes, so you
can safely and efficiently ride anywhere. There are also bicycle paths,
like the one along the coast between Limhamn and Malmö. No one -- except
the very young -- bothers to wear a helmet. The result of the bicycle
lanes on nearly all roads is that you can actually do useful things with
a bicycle -- it is a great substitute for a car -- in Sweden, whereas in
the USA you typically use your car to drive to a bicycle path, and then
ride the bicycle on the path that does not actually go anywhere useful.
So cycling is recreation in North America, and a legitimate means of
transportation in Sweden.

July 25
Later during the Measurement day between the Swedish International
Championship and the World Championship. Almost all event measurement
checks have been completed. It is time for the prize giving for the
Swedish International Championship and the opening ceremonies for the
World Championship.  There were speeches from the commodore, the local
government official responsible for sport, and International 505 Class
President Tom Bojland. Then we got down to eating the food and drinking
the Swedish sparkling wine. The commodore took his blazer off for the
rest of the regatta and served as RC and organizer.

Swedish International Championship and World Championship top ten
finishers were all given prizes, a bottle of Swedish sparkling wine and
red roses.

July 26
First Day of Racing
Two Races
The World Championship schedule was (per day): 2 races, 1 race, 2 race
, lay day, 1 race, 2 races, 1 race, so two races today (first day). But
first an opportunity to check e-mail. Unfortunately there was no
internet cafe so we were all trying to use a PC in the jury room or one
of two PCs in the MSS office. The jury room and the MSS office tended to
be busy after racing, so before launching was a good time to grab a PC.
I do not know if they had the same Internet connection, but the PCs in
the club office were much faster than the one in the jury room. And if
it wasn't for the PC we would be trying to stay out of the jury room.

July 27
One Race
A one race day, and a race with breeze. There was a postponement as
a very large ferry cruised through the race course. Meller/Falsone were
the pathfinder and led at the first weather mark. Bergström/Barne fought
their way through the leaders to win the race. The breeze was reported
as 24 knots at the start, 20 knots part way up the first beat and for
most of the rest of the race, but noticeably dying off as the leaders
went down the final run. It stayed down for the beat to the finish.
Once ashore, perhaps the most noticeable thing was how everyone was
smiling after a fun breezy race.

July 29
Lay Day
A chance to relax! Some competitors believe that we are at a World
Championship to race, not to relax and see the area. They would like to
race a 505 world championship in fewer days, with two races each day.
I disagree. Perhaps a compromise would be building more time in the
schedule between the pre-worlds and the world championships. People who
prefer to not spend all the time at the venue could simply skip the
pre-worlds. This particular lay day was terrific. Apart from there being
no wind all day, so we could not have raced anyway, it was a great day
for swimming, exploring swimming, or just relaxing.

July 30
One Race
Clear water at the launching ramp	Relaxing in the club restaurant
A light air day	An RC boat crew rests while on standby


A one race day, after the lay day. The lay day had almost no wind, and
today started out as a repeat. After several postponements we launched,
and to our surprise, got a race off in light air. We rolled over Krister
Bergström shortly after the start, as Hamlin/Alarie were squeezing him
from below. He footed off in an effort to go left, lost more ground and
then bailed right. Then most of the leaders went right, and we stayed
with them. Bergström went back left, crossed behind all of us, but
Bergström/Barne were positioned for the left shift -- along with about
twenty other teams to the left -- and led at the weather mark and won
the race. Duhhh!

During the lay day and the postponement on the following day, I took
some gear photographs, mostly of the Wolfang Hunger/Holger Jess 505, the
latest model Rondar with the updated interior, and the Krister
Bergström/Johan Barne 505, a Van Munster extensively modifed by Krister.

Krister's boat had a very high aspect ratio centerboard that would only
fit within the centreboard trunk -- nothing sticking out below the trunk
-- if the mast was removed. I believe the International Rules Committee
(IRC) is going to consider a ruling on this. The class rules require
that a centreboard can be retracted so that none of it sticks out below
the centreboard case. The rule does not say if the mast can be taken out
to do this. Krister had extended the centreboard trunk of the boat
forward, and the centreboard pin was all the way forward in the extended
area. I would expect a very long pin bracket, but did not see it.
Someone measured the span with the blade down (boat on its side), and
I think it was significantly deeper than anyone else's high aspect ratio
centreboard. Krister also had two high aspect ratio rudders, one of
which is probably the highest aspect ratio foil I have ever seen.
Apparently the head is almost solid carbon fibre. Krister also had
a zipper on his slot gaskets. This was somehow tied to the movement of
the centreboard so that the slot gaskets were closed as the board went
down and opened as the board went up. Amazing! The back of the
centreboard case cap was cut away, and Krister built in a new aft cap
which can be seen in the photos. Apparently this was to make it easier
the skipper to cross the boat in tacks and gybes. Bergström/Barne used
UK sails, but it is the same Rebbel loft they have always dealt with,
now part of the UK chain, and the sails are made with the UK tape drive.
I believe they were using a Proctor Cumulus mast.

The Wolfgang Hunger/Holger Jess Rondar was built using a new laminating
system from SP Systems. The idea appears to be to get some of the
benefit of pre-preg, and eliminate the time constraints that a wet layup
with room temperature cure resin has. This resin will not cure at room
temperature, so once the vacuum bag is on and the vacuum pulled, the
boat is put in an oven for curing. The hull shape is the same as Rondar
has had for awhile, though Rondar's hull mould does allow for some minor
changes in hull shape. The foredeck-bulkhead-seat tanks-transom mould
has been updated. The forward thwart is now wider, and the aft face has
a bulkhead going down to the tank-hull join area. The aft thwart may be
gone (it looked to me like the Hunger/Jess boat did not have the aft
thwart but did have two angled traveller thwarts instead), while the
centreboard trunk cap goes much further aft, down to the floor. The top
of the transom is wider and the transom corners are rounded, which
should make a transom bridle work better, and also is easier on the
hulls of other 505s in collisions. Hunger/Jess were using a molded high
aspect ratio gybing centreboard made in machined aluminum moulds. I did
not see the Hunger/Jess blade but did see another one built from the
same moulds. It was a think of beauty and was VERY fair. Their molded
rudder had broken recently, and they were using a rather low aspect
ratio rudder. Hunger/Jess used Bojsen-Moller sails, and I believe they
had a Superspar M2 mast.

Neither of these teams had upper spreaders. Hunger/Jess did have high
trapeze wires that could be lowered for upwind work.

July 31
Last Two Race Day

The last two race day. Again it looked like it was going to be light
air, but the breeze filled in enough to launch, and we completed two
races. Their finishes in these two races wrapped up first place for
Wolfgang Hunger/Holger Jess, and second place for Krister
Bergström/Johan Barne. The rest of the positions were a free for all
with one final race to go.

August 1
Last Day, Final Race
The last day and the final race. Since Wolfgang Hunger/Holger Jess had
wrapped up first overall, and Krister Bergström/Johan Barne had wrapped
up second overall, these two teams did not launch. Holger hijacked
a yacht and commandeered it for spectator purposes, inviting Elizabeth
Thompson and visitors from CSC Denmark aboard. What the owner thought of
this was not recorded.

Many teams wanted to go left, so the crowd trying to gate early was
huge. While there may have been some advantage to the left, the
pathfinder apparently rounded the weather mark second, while a number of
teams working the lef ended up overstanding the windward mark. Howard
Hamlin/Peter Alarie were in the top three at the weather mark and
thereafter, and they worked through to take the gun at the finish line.

The US container had been picked up and taken away during the race,
along with the extra gear and packing material inside, so the US teams
were not able to load the container until it was returned, shortly
before the prize presentation dinner.

