The 1993 West River Mid-Atlantic 505 Regatta

The Chesapeake Bay area 505 fleets prefer to schedule events in the
spring and fall when the chances of wind and planing conditions are
better. As a result, 505s race three times at West River Sailing Club in
September and October. The first of these fall events is the West River
Mid-Atlantics; held September 18-19. The fleet included the teams or
skippers that finished 1, 2, 16 and 21st at the recent North American
Championship in Michigan!

This year the 505s went to a shorter race format -- 35 to 45 minutes --
and a six minute rather than ten minute starting sequences that allowed
the West River Star Fleet race committee to run nine races, and kept the
fleet close together for some exciting racing. The 505 fleet had two
full days of racing!

Conditions ranged from marginal trapezing to planing upwind and down in
the last race. Ali Meller (NAs runner up) and Allan Johnson won the
first race; Rene de la Rie/Mike Smith won the very close 2nd race. North
American 505 champion Macy Nelson, sailing this event with Carl Smit,
won the third race putting them in the lead, but a premature start in
race 5 dropped them back behind Meller/Johnson. Nelson/Smit came out
charging for Sunday's first race (race 6), winning a race-long duel with
Meller/Johnson. Nelson/Smit lead at every mark, with Meller/Johnson
rarely more than a couple of boat-lengths behind. Tacking duels on the
2nd and 3rd beats closed up the fleet, keeping the race outcome in doubt
until the finish. Nelson/Smit faltered in race 7, and were not able to
complete race 8 or start race 9 due to other commitments, dropping them
to 5th overall.

Meller/Johnson of the WRSC won the Mid-Atlantics. The Hampton VA team of
Kenny Elliot/Allan Kilgore won the last race to vault into 2nd ahead of
Hampton Yacht Club sailors Henry and Barb Amthor, who finished 3rd
overall. Rene de la Rie/Mike Smith of the Severn Sailing Association
were 4th.

