https://www.yachtsandyachting.com/news/290497/505-Autumn-Open-at-Hayling-Island

505 Autumn Open at Hayling Island Sailing Club

by Charles Dwyer 1 Oct 10:48 BST
27-28 September 2025


Hayling Island welcomed the Fireballs and 505 fleets for an Autumn Open
this past weekend. The 505s are resurgent in the UK with a strong and
growing local fleet.

With 14 entries, including several championship winners from different
classes the scene was set for some close racing. Even a hardy few from
Scotland and Ireland made the trip. It was lining up to be an exciting
competition.

Saturday kicked off with a relatively medium forecast: 12-15knts from
the South. The PRO, Greg Wells, and his team took the fleet to the
western race area south of the island and got things off bang on
schedule.

Race 1 kicked off with a slight starboard bias luring a few to the boat
end of the line, but in the long run it didn't pay as the veterans of
Hayling went for the port end and as the left-hand favoured beat proved
to pay dividends, with Rob Gullan and Paul Childs leading from the
left-hand side. As the race developed, National Champions Mike and Carl
slipped into the lead and dominated the rest of the race, with Roger and
Ian Mitchell in second, followed by Ian Pinnell and Charles Dwyer.

Race 2 started quickly afterwards, and again the left-hand track paid
off with Roger and Ian leading out from the left with a cracking start.
On the menu again was the windward/Leeward course, so there was plenty
of high-speed downwind with full wiring reaches as the breeze gradually
increased. Roger and Ian showed their talent by extending their lead,
followed by Ian and Charles, with Mike and Carl. Mike and Carl slipped
into second when Ian and Charles picked the left leeward gate and the
race finished in that order.

Race 3 got going with a more pin-end bias on the line, which was owned
by Ian and Charles. As they led out to the left, it looked golden. After
tacking over, there was a knock on port, and the boats that came back
from the right were now lifted. Jim Blyth and Darrel Samerdule from
Largo Bay, along with Roger and Ian, powering in from the right.
Rounding the top mark by the end of the beat were Mike and Carl, who led
for the rest of the race, with Ian and Charles in second and Roger and
    Ian in third.

After the long day's racing, the sailors returned to the club for a well
deserved beer (aren't they all!!), and to watch England win the Womens
Rugby World Cup. Then the fleet met in the HISC members' area for
a debrief of the day's racing to discuss and share knowledge across the
fleet. The legendary multiple world champion Ian Mitchell led the
session. It was a brilliant way to develop the sailors in the fleet, and
everyone took away lessons and ways of improving technique, boat setups
and teamwork improvements.

Day 2's forecast had been looking dodgy all week. It was unlikely to
happen with little to no wind forecast across all models. Start time was
scheduled for 11 a.m., and surprisingly, as the sailors arrived in the
club for the HISC's tasty English breakfast, they were greeted with
a steady southerly 8-10knt breeze from the southwest. Boats were readied
and the fleet launched at 10.45. As the fleet rounded the headland past
the Hayling Lifeboat Station, they faced a gloomy day, with the Isle of
Wight hidden entirely behind low clouds.

With a short postponement, Greg got the Race 4 goingâ€”the strong tide
down the course, kept all the boats behind the line for the start. There
was a 5-degree bias on the port end, and just when Ian and Charles
thought they owned the pin, Harvey Hilary and Cam Mitchell who were
sailing the UK Class boat "Marlow Ropes" came blasting in on port and
crossed the fleet clear and in style.

As they continued to the right-hand side of the beat with wet telltales
and a slight tendency not to go close hauled up the beat!!, the breeze
filled from the left and the leader came in with it. Charles and Ian
rounded the top mark first, Mike and Carl in second, and Rob and Paul in
third. The breeze died away over the race, and they all finished in that
order. It's important to note that young Cam Mitchell out "kite-trimmed"
his dad, Ian Mitchell, who, in the absence of Roger Gilbert, had jumped
on board with Judith Williamson for the day and passed them on the last
run home to get 6th.

As the breeze died and the drizzle arrived, the day looked over. The
race committee moved to the AP and waited to see if anything developed.
After 20 minutes, the fleet was sent home, and the event was drawn to
a close.

As always, Hayling Island Sailing Club hosted a fantastic event with
a great social.
