1999 505 World Championship Regatta Reports from the Field
July 10, 1999 - Quiberon, France
Alarm clock, what's that?

We had to get up pretty early this morning for the race was called at
7:50am an hour away from the beach but it was worth it since the sun
rises with great colours and the wind was steadily blowing 12 knots with
somewhat choppy conditions.... a few crews had a pretty hard wake up
since one of them forgot to hook before going out on the wire and a few
boats capsized on the way to the starting line.

Howard Hamlin did not race since he had won the championship. Andy
Beeckman and Ben Benjamin were nervous to maintain their second overall.
But Mark Upton Brown who had not sailed as well as he is used to enjoyed
the early morning breeze and won that race with an impressive speed
going upwind. The race was fun and fast given the conditions we
experienced this morning. As soon as we got back to the beach we packed
our boat and get clean and ready for the prizegiving ceremony...

Many thanks to all the participants and the people who had made possible
the 99 regatta. Some very moving words to Huguette from everyone and in
particular from Mark Upton Brown. Our President Pip Pearson made a nice
talk and we all rushed to the buffet after having heard all the best
about the next World Championship organization in Durban next year.

Overall a great event raced in very light conditions except the very
last race and a great winner with Howard Hamlin and his crew Mike
Martin. Howard had some nice words to his boat builders, his wife and
his faithful crew and team mates in Long Beach, California. He was
obviously genuinely happy for this great achievement. This event will
remain as the largest turnout at a World in the 5o5 history which has
resulted in spectacular races.

Congratulations to the winners and to all the participants.

Best regards
Jean-Baptiste
P.S. See you all in Durban

July 9, 1999 - Quiberon, France
It's never like this here.

Wind died at the time of the race leaving the 156 competitors very
frustrated...the 157th was mumbling that this was "so great" sitting at
the bar and contemplating their competitors drying out and sipping beer
waiting for the breeze to settle in vain...

Howard Hamlin and Mike Martin's chances to win the championship
increased tremendeously today since he leads the championship with seven
points. The race committee informed us that race 5 (the only left to be
raced) will start very early (7:50a.m. on the water, an hour away from
the launching beach).

Cheers
Jean-Baptiste

From the ISAF webserver...

L'Ecole National de Voile -- the French National Sailing School --
provides an incredible venue for this 505 World Championship, with
plenty of room to park the 505s on shore, a fleet of RC vessels, an
outstanding Race Committee, and a gorgeous beach to swim from, and
launch the 505s from. The French Olympic sailing team trains at this
venue. The race courses are within Quiberon Bay, a large body of water
on the south coast of Brittany, formed by the fishhook shape of the
Quiberon peninsula. With local sea breezes, coastal see breezes, weather
systems and complex tides, racing is extremely challenging; winning
a race takes not only an excellent start and very good speed around the
course, but a detailed understanding of the day's conditions. Great
sailing is not the only attraction of the venue, as Quiberon and nearby
St. Pierre Quiberon have more restaurants and bars than the competitors
can hope to sample in the two weeks we are spending in this wonderful
corner of the world. For those whose intersts extend beyond sailing,
eating and drinking with friends, nearby Carnac is the site of a an
incredible stone alignment much larger than Stonehenge and thought to be
about the same age.

In a 157 505 fleet, there are a number of competitors who are sailing
their first 505 world championship, but the talent in the fleet goes
very deep, with Olympic medalists, multiple world champions in the 505
as well as Flying Dutchman, 470, Soling and other classes, America's Cup
sailors and many national and regional champions in the 505 and other
classes. The video of the mark roundings shows incredibly close racing,
with every inch and every finish position keenly contested around the
race course. Some finishes have had much of the fleet finishing
virtually overlapped, after 18 nautical mile races; the RC finish horn
can be heard sounding at less than one second intervals. A simple
mistake such as missing a shift can easily cost 30 boats.

July 8, 1999 - Quiberon, France
Where's the breeze?

From the ISAF webserver...

Despite the Race Committee's best efforts, no race could be run Thursday
due to light and variable winds, so we remain at four races completed,
and are now expecting a six -- rather than seven -- race series. Long
Beach, USA, sailors Howard Hamlin and Mike Martin, who have been
finished in the top positions at 505 World Championships many times, but
have never won a 505 world championship, lead the standings with a first
and three seconds. Another Long Beach team of Andy Beckman and Ben
Benjamin hold down second place overall with two firsts a fifth and
a ninth. In third overall are 1990 505 World Champions Jorgen Schonherr
and Anders Kaempe of Denmark. Multiple time 470 World Champion Wolfgang
Hunger sailing with Holger Jess, from Germany, are in fourth overall,
while four time 505 World Champion Krister Bergstrom with Thomas Moss
from Sweden are in fifth.
G
With 157 505s racing, this is believed to be the largest 505 World
Championship held in the 505 class's forty four year history. Due to the
505 class's use of gate starts, there have been no recalls, and each of
the four gate starts so far was successful. The 505 class recently chose
to make the 505 World Championship open, and this has attracted a number
of newcomers into the 505. "There are more French 505 sailors here than
we have had at a French National Championship for many years", said
World organizer Jean-Baptiste Dupont. "The open worlds is the reason
many of them have joined the 505 class." ISAF President Paul Henderson
was in the gate launch for the start of races two and three, a perfect
location to see the excitement, close starting and tactics of a gate
start.

July 7, 1999 - Quiberon, France
Mike and Howie keep on rolling

Our competitors were very surprised with the level of control put
forward by the French organizers (not the French class by the way).
Yesterday one competitor had his boat controlled and reweight this
morning under the threat to be excluded... luckily the boat was allright
and the race results were OK. Today 5 guys had to comply with the
anti-doping controls... just as the tour de France cyclists.... three
boats failed the black band check (main sail over mast black band)...

Howard Hamlin won race 4 brillantly taking the lead from Andy Beeckman
still too inconsistant to win the trophy despite a great talent he
demonstrated in the former races and in leading the fleet after the
first beat today. Krister Bergstroem finished second and Shoenherr third
in his wonderfull and flashy brand new Rondar very well fitted out.

The weather was pretty much the same as yesterday with a high over the
area bringing a typical thermal breeze in the afternoon making the race
fun to race and very spectacular in a force 3 to 4 breeze. Pip Pearson
chaired the annual AGM were several topics were discussed such as the
big spinnaker trials, the next coming World championships in Durban,
Portugal , Fremantle, and Sweden (full minutes will be distributed later
on). About 12 protests were lodged today and will be investigated
tomorrow morning so the results published below are still provisional.

Cheers
Jean-Baptiste

July 6, 1999 - Quiberon, France
Where the hell is Long Beach?

The Californian squad from Long Beach conforted their lead on the
championship making one and two at the third race today. Weather was
misty in the morning clearing up with wind changing in strength and
direction until the sea breeze settled and blew force 4 in the end of
the afternoon making this race fun and spectacular. (150+ boats on
a tight reach with some spectacular fights to stay on the line...
wow!!!)

The place is very complex to sail and only the very top sailors manage
to work it out. It is a very selective race area and any minor mistake
results in a dramatic drop in the ranking... Ali who made a wonderful
start for instance got trapped by the shift of up to 15 degrees biaising
the line tremendeously.. forcing him to bear away in the shifting wind
to reach the mark together with all the early starters.

The Californian Andy Beeckman and his crew Ben Benjamin were the fastest
in these conditions followed by Howard Hamlin in good position to win
the championship... After three races only a few blokes can now pretend
to win the trophy and given the wind conditions are going to be light
all the way long, according to the met office , the big guys are not
lilkely to make it for their more than average results so far. The fast
American rigs (in light and medium air) with their long and thin foils
may well pave the way to improve the boat a bit more eventhough this new
way of sailing forces the crew to watch for seaweed caught in the foils
constantly during the race.... The point is that they are damn fast at
the moment...

Marcel Buffet in his late 70ties, rounded the windward mark 25th and
managed to finished 41st, proving that age does not matter as long as
the talent is there... Marcel has just found a new rig set up and he is
working it out better and better everyday.

It was "Caribean soiree" tonight at the venue with a killer punch who
almost made it impossible to send out today's report... but I made it
safe to the computer,... luckily , but hard though. 10 protests were
lodged today but half of them were lodged by the jury itself... with
only two disqualifications.

Cheers
Jean-Baptiste
PS: we are having so much fun... and we still miss you all

July 5, 1999 - Quiberon, France
The British strike back.

Unlike the Americans yesterday, the Brits did not hoist the Union Jack
despite Ian Pinnell winning race 2 in very tactictal conditions. The
weather was unstable with wind blowing mainly from South West 2 to 3 and
flukey. It was sunny most of the time but some rain showers cooled down
our competitors at times...

It was hard to find a gap at the buoy given the very large number of
boats on the racing course and the traffic is such that some spectacular
congestions of 505s have been common in the Quiberon bay area so far.
The Ecole Nationale de Voile is filming the race and shows the tape at
the bar... it is awesome and very instructive to watch the competitors
manoeuvering at full speed. Ian Pinnell and his talented crew, Nick
Powell, managed to work out the conditions and their speed today was
amazing... they had repaired the boat the previous night since the
forestay system fell apart in the middle of race 1 preventing them from
tuning the boat for light air...only medium tuning was available for
most of the race yesterday.

Howard Hamlin managed to finish second and thus takes the lead of the
championship. Howard, whom I interviewed tonight, was still very worried
of the outcome of the protest hearing he was involved in tonight for an
alleged fault that he had not exonarated himself quick enough according
to the German team Mulhbauer/Angela Stenger... Howard was relieved that
the jury considered that there was no fault even though he did it, the
jury agreed that Howard did not have to do the 720. (Howard was not too
upset despite the loss, for Ian's lead was really impressive and he
managed to pull back the two places he lost doing the 720 turn).

A new talented French sailor made the tens today. Laurent Hay is
a former 470 champion who took to the 505 a year ago and is improving
fast in the class. Philippe Boite and Jean-Luc Muzellec have now a very
slim chance left to win the championship. They caught seaweed on the
centerboard yesterday and could not get rid off it easily, and today
despite a very good start they found themselves in the middle of a calm
patch which made them struggle in the fifties for some time.

Four protests were lodged with the jury which is still very reasonable
given the turnout. Two of them were lodged by the jury himself, one for
no buoyancy aid and another for start line infringement withe the guard
boat. For the record, it is interesting to mention that the guard boat
was pretty agressive today since he hit one of the British competitors
while manoeuvering around the pathfinder... After the race we learned
    that he broke his throttle and Vernon was cleared of the
    infringement...

Cheers
Jean-Baptiste
PS: We miss you all

July 4, 1999 - Quiberon, France
Stars and Stripes for today!!

After packing up all the boats, the Americans hoisted the Stars and
Stripes on the boat park, proudly displaying their mastery of the
Quiberon bay. An impressive one-two puts the Americans in pole position
for the remainder of the week. The wind conditions were SW 2-3 with more
waves than wind, and more boats than ever before in a 505 world
championship. There were 157 boats at the start with 156 lined up
waiting for the rabbit to release them after a year of preparation.  The
boats included four former 505 world champions and at least thirty who
have represented their country at the olympics. The weather was cloudy
with sunny and rainy spells, with all of the heat that was present in
the pre-worlds replaced with cooler temperatures. The wind was steady in
direction but not in strength and the local coast effect were felt
strongly on a receding tide.

The Bavarian pathfinder showed everyone that the right side payed, and
was placed as the fleet rounded the windward mark. Despite adding 4 Kg
to his boat on measurement day, Shoenherr confirmed the speed he has
demonstrated in winning the preWorlds. Pierre-Jean Gallo and Fabrice
Toupet broke the mould for the French team in finishing tenth in front
of the star Philippe Boite who normaly leads the French squad. Marcel
Buffet in his late seventies continues to make a tremendeous 63rd
proving that he is still in the "peloton" (in reference to the Tour de
France).

Considering there were over 150 boats racing, it is a nice surprise that
only two protests were lodged with the Jury, with only one being heard
which resulted in a disqualification. The second protest was rejected
due to a confusion on the hearing time letting the faulting boat to get
away with the (alleged) infringement which was videotaped and displayed
along with the rest of the video coverage of the race. Will we soon need
a third umpire ?

We all enjoyed such a race with many competitors and it has proven an
outstanding success to see so many 5o5s racing in the Quiberon bay. Of
course it is special since one can gain or lose so many places with one
single "bon coup" or mistake: however the confusion created by the many
boat wakes was very difficult to sail in.

Everybody is impressed with the huge task which has been completed by
the ENV and the international class team to organise the event so
smoothly. The 5o5 family warmly welcomed Paul Henderson, the ISAF
president, who made the trip to Quiberon to attend the World
championship, tomorrow and Tuesday. Paul will have the opportunity to
meet with the 5o5ers and sail himself a 5o5 for the first time.

What will be remembered is the wonderful turnout and the beautiful 5o5
fleet racing in the Quiberon bay...

Regards
Jonathan Rennie and Jean-Baptiste Dupont
GBR8704

-----------------

1999 505 World Champions Howard Hamlin and Mike Martin
Interview by Jesse Falsone, 505 8643

Howard Hamlin and Mike Martin have finally done it ñ in convincing
fashion, they won the 1999 505 World Championship in Quiberon, France
(the 44th edition of this event). Its hard to believe that in a talent
laden field of 157 boats, Hamlin and Martin never finished worse than
second in any race. This event marked Howardís twentieth attempt at
a world championship. Hamlin and Martin first sailed a worlds together
in 1995, placing 12th at Mounts Bay. Howard placed second in Australia
sailing with Cam Lewis in 1996. In 1997, Hamlin and Martin teamed again
in Denmark to place third in a light-air world championship. Then, Mike
and Howard proved themselves as contenders in the diverse conditions
during the Hyannis Worlds, finishing second to Trotman and Mills.

At 46 years old, Howard is no spring chicken, but heís in better shape
than most sailors half his age. Heís a third generation Californian,
which is apparently a rare trait even among Californians. Howard oozes
California, sporting surfer shorts, flip-flops, and cool looking shades
most of the time (or at least any time Iíve seen him). Surfing was his
first passion, and he still claims that surfing is the toughest sport in
the world to learn. However, sailing 505ís became an obsession in the
70ís. A skilled craftsman, Howard built the famed Hamlin 505 molds still
in use today by Larry Tuttle at Waterat. Perhaps that is why Howard
remains a steadfast supporter of Waterat. As one of the first fully
cored, all plastic 505ís, the Hamlin 505 was certainly ahead of its
time. Twenty years later many Hamlin 505ís are still sailing and are
fully competitive.

Howard is a self-professed "late bloomer" in the 505 class. It wasnít
until 1990 that he won his first North American Championship (sailing
with Steve Rosenberg). Since then, Howard has won three more North
American Championships (í92 with Cam, and í96 and í99 with Mike). The
legendary Dennis Surtees is the only sailor with more wins at the North
Americans (Dennis won 5 times). Howard has established himself as a 505
sailor for the ages. Quietly, he has been a constant force shaping the
class for decades while raising the bar for boats and sailors. Itís not
surprising that Howard has been recognized internationally as one of the
top high-performance skippers in the world. He is now a regularly
invited guest at the 18 Foot Skiff World Championships. Naturally, Mike
is the middle man in the skiff. At last years event, Howard was the
first American skipper in 50 years to win a heat. Howard and Mike now
train on their own skiff in Los Angeles, and you can bet that they will
be a force to be reckoned with at the next skiff worlds.

In contrast, Mike Martin was an early bloomer. Mike grew up in the
Annapolis area, but always seemed destined for the left coast according
to some of his friends. One accomplished Thistle sailor in Annapolis
spoke of Mike as the best young sailor he had ever seen. Mike crewed on
the winning Thistle Nationals teams in 1982 and 1984. He then went on to
claim All-American status at Old Dominion, a Collegiate Single-handed
Championship and a Laser North American Championship. An intense Olympic
Finn campaign ensued where Mikeís lightweight build forced him to wear
about 40 pounds of weight to stay competitive. Perhaps he rationalized
that getting a job and retaining his ability to walk were more important
than the Olympics. Mike has sailed 505ís with many great skippers
including Jeff Miller and Macy Nelson. The Miller/Martin team finished
a respectable 5th at the 1996 505 Worlds and Nelson/Martin were 2nd at
the 1990 505 North Americans.

Like Howard, Mike likes to tinker ñ a perfect trait for a 505 crew. He
designed and built many of the systems in use on Hamlin/Martin 505s.
Mikeís pole launcher system works flawlessly, just donít be anywhere
near the aft end of the pole when it releases! Mike is also a big
believer in cascading purchase systems to reduce friction. Their new
Waterat (not the boat used to win the worlds) is a treatise on efficient
purchases. Mike has also been instrumental in the design of the new
Waterat tack fitting made by Larry Tuttle. Together with Larry, Mike did
much of the technical design work for the custom Waterat foils. A short
design article on these high-aspect foils was published by Sailing World
a few months ago, but weíre hoping that a more complete description is
made available to Tank Talk in the future. The top two boats at the
Quiberon worlds used the Waterat Custom Foils (the ones used by Mike and
Howie were slightly different than the foils used by Andy and Benny).

After speaking with Howard and Mike, I now have a clear understanding of
why I look at their transom so often on the race course. This team has
a depth and intensity rarely seen, and they have worked hard for several
years to develop the skills they posses. In my opinion, they are also
the best prepared 505 team in the US, and probably the planet. Howard
and Mike are focused empirical sailors. They devoted an immense amount
of time under controlled conditions in order to wring out every ounce of
speed from their boat. By contrast, Trotman and Mills gave the
impression of a less calculated approach to their training and racing.
Although Nick and Mike trained with other boats extensively during their
campaign, none of their tuning partners had exactly the same set-up.
Instead, Nick and Mike relied on developing a superior feel. In either
case, these world champions share a fervent desire to win, an
unparalleled commitment to the program, and a belief in themselves.

When we spoke at the North Americans in Corpus, you both stated that
winning a 505 World Championship is incredibly difficult. How, then,
with the largest 505 Worlds fleet in history, did you make winning look
so easy this time around?

Howard Hamlin - It looked easy because it was not too shifty and for the
first time we had really good speed in all conditions, up and down wind.
We have always been very fast up wind in moderate air and I think we
were actually just a little slower this year. The big difference this
year was that we were finally real fast on the runs and reaches.
Typically we rounded the weather mark about 7th or 8th and then sailed
through the fleet on the off wind legs.

Other than the very crowded starts or the fear of getting taken out by
some novice at a start, the size of the fleet did not make much
difference. Since it was not very shifty, all the fast guys would round
the first mark well which put a huge premium on down wind speed, where
we excelled.

Mike Martin - It looked easier than it really was. Our scores of
2,2,2,1,dns made it look like we walked away with it. The truth of the
matter is it was very close. After 4 races Ben and Andy were only
4 points behind us, and they had rounded the weather mark first in 3 of
the 4 races. We were quite nervous that our own tuning partners were
going to beat us. Subsequently, the next two races were cancelled and
the regatta was over for us. We did not have to sail the last race, the
young bucks finished this race 6th giving the illusion that we had
a huge lead

Howard, after about 20 years of trying, you finally won the big one.
After coming so close to winning this event in the past, do you feel
a sense of redemption and relief?

HH - My immediate reaction was elation followed by relief that a huge
burden was off my shoulders. Especially given that we had put such an
organized effort into it the last 3 years. In the early years I never
put much time into it. I just sailed a few West Coast regattas and went
to the Worlds each year. There was no feeling of redemption because in
the past I never felt like we deserved to win. But this year was
different because it was the first year that I felt we were fully
prepared and that we could win. It was real rewarding to see that all
the organization and training with our teammates paid off.

The best part and most surprising thing about winning was the reaction
from everyone when we returned home. Everyone I know is so excited about
our win. I had no idea how many people were pulling for us.

I heard that your victory speech in France conveyed a great deal of joy
and emotion. What was said?

HH - Obviously, the moment was pretty exciting and I said something to
that effect. Here's what I remember saying: First and foremost I gave
Mike the credit for recognizing and convincing me that the dream could
be a reality if we just trained and raced more. I thanked Mike for his
complete dedication and his more than 50% contribution to the entire
campaign. I thanked Julie for her support and willingness to have me
spend so many hours at it. I never knew how important it was to her
until I saw how excited she was when we won. I thanked all our training
partners back home and those that were there, Andy Beeckman, Ben
Benjamin, Dan Thompson and Andy Zinn. I mentioned it was this training
that got us fast on all points of sail in any breeze, and pushed over
the top so we could win. I mentioned the sentimental aspect of winning
on exactly my twentieth worlds and that it was real rewarding to be the
first to win in a boat out of the molds I built over 20 years ago.
Lastly, I thanked all the competitors we have gotten to know and
befriend over the years and the tremendous support and encouragement we
felt from all of them.

This is the first world title for a Waterat 505, built from your very
own hull mold originally used to make the Hamlin 505. Some people
thought you were crazy to again buy a new Waterat this year with Rondars
consistently winning world titles for over a decade. Given the track
record, did you ever have any doubt that a Waterat could win the worlds?

HH - When we ordered a new boat, it never occurred to me to buy anything
other than a Waterat. Keep in mind that we won it in our "Europe" boat,
a 10 year old Waterat that I bought from Dave Shelton and Bruce Edwards
5 years ago. I have never thought that Rondars are any better. The only
real difference is that Waterats are stiffer and made from
epoxy/honeycomb so they might be a little lighter in the ends and most
important, they last longer.

MM - We never considered anything else. We did not want to make that big
of a change, and a Waterat will last forever.

You have been working with Jay Glaser at Ullman/Danger for a long time
on the 505 sails. This has been a great benefit to your team, but also
the entire class in the North America. Can you comment on your long-term
relationship with Jay?

HH - Jay is the best sailmaker I have ever known and is a very important
part of our 505 campaign. I have been working with Jay on our sails for
over 20 years. He has patterns and records on nearly every sail he has
made for us. He has an incredible ability replicate sails exactly. His
attention to detail is incredible. He always has an open mind is always
ready to try something new.

Howard, what does Mike do best in the 505?

HH - What Mike does best is that he good at everything; boat handling,
boat speed, boat work, organization, designing new systems, tactics,
calm, protests, goal setting, creative, open minded, strategy and always
willing to make the time and financial commitments.

Mike, what does Howard do best in the 505?

MM - It is certainly not hiking out. Seriously though, Howard is great
to sail with. He has a great disposition, he likes to have fun and most
of all, Howard likes to win. If I had to say what he does best, it would
be making sure that the boat is set up properly. After sailing 505s for
20 years, he can immediately set up the boat to be fast in any
condition. Additionally he can quickly recognize when the boat is not
set up right and make the necessary adjustment. Sometimes these changes
are only quarter inch adjustments in the ram or rig tension, but it is
the difference between being twentieth or in top five at the weather
mark in a worlds fleet. When your boat is fast everything else is much
easier.

You guys seem to have great chemistry. Is there anything you don't agree
on?

HH - No question the chemistry is good. We spend a lot of time together
sailing 505's, 18's and snowboard/skiing so fortunately we get along
well.

There are plenty of things that we don't always agree on. We think that
it is good to think different. It is a check and balance system. If we
thought the same we would be making the same mistakes. I think we have
a lot of respect for each other and value the other's opinion. The key
is having an open mind. Here is a simple example of what I mean; we
might each look at a sail and one might think it is too flat and the
other says it is too full, our response is typically, "Well then it must
be just right".

MM - There is plenty that we do not agree on. For example we had a major
disagreement on the color of the new boat. Howie wanted dark green with
a stripe and I wanted aqua with no stripe. We could not agree so we just
got it the same as 7771.

Can you comment on how you practiced with a tuning partner?

HH - Our training program is what made the difference. Several years ago
we started to recruit the best sailors we could find like Dan Thompson,
Andy Beekman, Ben Benjamin, to add to our local fleet of Rob Waterman,
Bruce Tilley. These guys all have fun training with us and where really
excited about our win knowing that they all had contributed.

Last year Andy Beekman and Ben Benjamin needed a boat so Mike sold them
his boat. This was important because they had always been really fast,
especially down wind and we needed them in a good boat to push us. That
is the only reason we bought the new boat. We share all information and
calibrate all boats the same. If one boat is consistently slow we'll
swap drivers or crew to identify differences.

In spring and summer we train every Tuesday night and maybe one day per
weekend. This year we had Morgan Conner from the U.S. Sailing center out
coaching on Tuesdays. He would set a course with regulation 55 degree
reaches. Even though he had no 505 experience he could observe
differences in sail settings and crew technique.

We think its best to train with 3 to 4 boats. Without a coach, we would
typically go up wind for 1 1/2 hours and reset up on opposite tacks
every 3 minutes. Then race downwind home.

MM - This was, without question, the one element of the program that
resulted in the biggest gains. Our tuning partners and practice program
over the past few years has enabled us to work on weaknesses and fine
tune our strong points. Our group has different sailors that are fast in
a variety of conditions. This means that someone is pushing you all the
time. We had a completely open line of communication between everyone,
and everyone gained from it. I would like to thank Andy Zinn & Dan
Thompson, Ben Benjamin & Andy Beeckman, Rob Waterman, Don Smith, and our
coach Morgan Connor, for coming out on all those Tuesday nights. Without
the support of these guys, we would not be World Champions. The practice
format that we used this year was different from past years. This year
we had our coach boat set up a triangle course. Half the beat we would
do only speed testing, the second half we would do regular racing. We
would regroup at the weather and leeward marks and discuss who was fast
and what they were doing. Morgan would observe boat setups and
techniques from the coach boat. Back on shore we would have a quick
meeting to recap what we learned that evening. We sailed 7 consecutive
Tuesday nights, and regattas on the weekends. This may sound like a lot
of effort, but it was not so difficult. We all have jobs and we were all
able to make every session. I can not stress enough how important this
practice was in achieving our goal of winning the worlds.

Howard, few 505 sailors win a world championship at your age. What is
the Howard Hamlin formula for longevity in the 505?

HH - I could not find a better boat to sail so I just kept sailing the
505. The beauty of sailing is that you get better with age. You know
a little more each year. So I guess that motivated me to keep going. And
what a great way to meet interesting people, travel and see the world!

Mike, you and Howard are the most meticulous 505 sailors I have ever
seen. Youíre level of boat preparation is unprecedented. Every system on
your boat has been thoroughly designed and tested. What is not apparent
is how you prepare your mind and body to compete at such a high level.
What is the Mike Martin formula for Zen and the Art of 505 Sailing?

MM - Believe it or not, I do not have a set theory in these areas, but
Iíll give it a shot anyway. Lets start with physical. The good news is
that to be a world champion crew you only have to be in good physical
shape, not great. You only need to be in good enough shape to get around
a worlds course and complete all of your tasks without fatigue getting
in the way. Physically, this is a much smaller challenge than winning
the Tour de France, for example. Most of my gym time focused on weight
gain. It was my goal to be 200 pounds, and that is what I got to for the
worlds. In terms of endurance, nothing is better for 505 sailing than
505 sailing. It works out the correct muscles and makes you a better
sailor at the same time. An occasional jog does not hurt either.

Mental preparation is not something that I knowingly control. I think
that is a constant frame of mind. Once we decided that we really wanted
to win the worlds, it was a goal that we constantly thought of how to
achieve for years (in Howard's case, obsessively). The only pre race tip
that I can give is to start thinking about the race as soon as you get
to the boat park, not just after the warning signal goes off.

Mike, hereís a free plug. Describe the differences between the Martin
foils and the standard Waterat foils. Do you think your foils will prove
to be more effective over a broad range of wind conditions? Are there
any design changes in store for Durban?

MM - The biggest difference between our blades and the standard Waterat
blades is aspect ratio. Simply put, the new blades are longer and
skinnier than the standard blades. Theoretically, this gives a better
lift to drag ratio. I wrote an article in the March 1999 Sailing World
that describes in detail the differences. We think that these blades are
slightly better in all conditions except light and choppy. As for future
developments, we don't have any changes planned now, but we have a few
different versions to test over the next year. We will probably know
more then.

Howard, to my knowledge, the teams in Los Angeles have been more
focussed on improving the performance of the upper echelon. Recruiting
fast sailors has been the priority, and you have been successful in
developing world champion caliber competitors. Will there more focus on
recruiting less advanced sailors in your area in the future?

HH - When I look back over the 25 years I have been sailing 505's it is
clear to me that the better sailors stay in the class and the novices
come and go. The more advanced sailors appreciate the boat and stick
with it. The novices get frustrated and quit. We lost several local
boats to novices who have not shown up for one regatta. We promote to
a much wider spectrum than you might think. There are plenty of sailors
that given good equipment and all our numbers can go as fast as we can.

Mike, you mention that Howard was obsessive about winning the worlds.
Did he dream about it? Does he constantly fidget with the boat? Did he
drag you out to practice more than was necessary? Was he on the phone
with Jay Glaser all the time talking about the sails? Give us some
specific examples.

MM - I have no idea what Howard dreams about. I don't go there, but yes,
he constantly fidgets with the boat. Every major event he makes a fixit
list. These lists are sometimes multiple pages. This can get to be
annoying, but you don't often see us DNF due to a breakdown, do you? As
for practice, there is no such thing as more practice than necessary.

Howard is always on the phone with someone about something. My guess is
30% of the time it is about sailing.

There is no argument that Howard is obsessive about sailing, but I am
not far behind him, we usually talk at least once a day about some
aspect of sailing. If you want funny obsessive stories about Howie, ask
his wife Julie. She has got some good ones.

Howard, many people who know you describe your desire to win as an
obsession. Is this a valid statement? If so, what types of behavior
would some people consider obsessive?

HH - Up until the last couple years, I always approached sailing just
like everything else that is important to me such as business, surfing,
skiing, snowboarding, maintaining my house/garden and my relationship
with Julie. However a of couple years ago Mike convinced me that if
I wanted to win we had to sail more, so I moved sailing up to the
highest priority. Some people might call that obsessive.

Mike, by most accounts, you guys were the fastest team off the wind.
I had the opportunity to watch you sail in after winning a race at the
Hyannis worlds. You were still working the boat as though you were
racing, and I noticed how smooth and coordinated your efforts were in
the waves. Have you consciously worked at becoming proficient off-wind
sailors, or has the feel just developed naturally over the course of
time?

We used to be slow downwind, so we focused on improving on this
weakness. We did lots of practicing, trying different things and soon we
were very fast downwind on the wire. However we were still slow downwind
sitting on the tanks, and did not know why. Then Benny and Andy came out
one day first time in a 505 in some borrowed boat and smoked us
downwind. At first we were discouraged, then we realized they were
a golden opportunity. We did everything we could to get them into our
fleet. I even sold them my boat at well under market value to ensure
they had the best equipment. We agreed to share information openly and
to work together. As a result we were the fastest boat downwind this
year. Our plan almost worked too well since they were the fastest boat
upwind, rounding the first weather mark in the lead 4 of the 5 races. We
were quite worried about loosing the regatta to them!

Mike, whatís next for you? There have been some rumors that you intend
to be the first-ever sailor to win the 505 worlds as a skipper and
a crew.

MM - What is next for me? I figure retire from sailing, move to Wyoming,
get married, and raise a family. NOT! Yes, the rumors are true. You
can't be a stud your whole life. I am going to put on some panties and
try driving for a while. I have learned from the best, so we will see
how I go. Howard and I will still be a team in the 18 foot skiff. We
have recruited Andy Zinn are training for the worlds in January in
Sydney. It would be nice to win that one at some point as well.

Howard, now that Mike is moving to the back of the boat, have you
thought about whom you might team up with next year? I assume we havenít
heard the last from Howard Hamlin!

HH - Cam Lewis and I have already committed to sailing the next Worlds
in South Africa. I have worked too long to get to where we are now, so
there is no reason to quit. Although having won the Worlds will allow me
to focus more time and energy on our 18' skiff campaign.

What advice would you give to a young, aspiring world champion just
beginning his/her 505 career?

HH - Keep trying, keep an open mind, keep asking the fast guys
questions, make the 505 a priority, have other interests, sail every
regatta, focus on your weaknesses, sail with people better than you,
sail with different people, don't give up, and most important, keep
sailing the 505 it is the best boat in the world.

MM

- Wear sunblock
- Sail in college
- When you first start sailing 505s, sail with someone who has some time
  in the boat. They can teach you how to set the boat up and all the
  little tricks.
- Don't try and reinvent the wheel. Just use what gear the fast guys are
  using. Leave experimentation with new gear to idiots like us.
- Most important, PRACTICE! Nothing is better than time in the boat.
- Have a good time. Remember that you are doing this for fun.

----------------

Race 1

Stars and Stripes for today!!

After packing up all the boats the Americans hoisted the Stars and
Stripes on the boat park, proudly displaying their mastery of the
Quiberon bay. An impressive one-two puts the Americans in pole position
for the remainder of the week.

The wind conditions were SW 2-3 with more waves than wind, and more
boats than ever before in a 505 world championship. There were 157 boats
at the start with 156 lined up waiting for the rabbit to release them
after a year of preparation.

The boats included four former 505 world champions and at least thirty
who have represented their country at the olympics.

The weather was cloudy with sunny and rainy spells, with all of the heat
that was present in the pre-worlds replaced with cooler temperatures.

The wind was steady in direction but not in strength and the local coast
effect were felt strongly on a receding tide.

The Bavarian pathfinder showed everyone that the right side payed, and
was placed as the fleet rounded the windward mark.

Despite adding 4 Kg to his boat on measurement day, Shoenherr confirmed
the speed he has demonstrated in winning the preWorlds.

Pierre-Jean Gallo and Fabrice Toupet broke the mould for the French team
in finishing tenth in front of the star Philippe Boite who normaly leads
the French squad.

Marcel Buffet in his late seventies continues to make a tremendeous 63rd
proving that he is still in the "peloton" (in reference to the Tour de
France).

Considering there were over 150 boats racing, it is a nice surprise that
only two protests were lodged with the Jury, with only one being heard
which resulted in a disqualification.

The second protest was rejected due to a confusion on the hearing time
letting the faulting boat to get away with the (alleged) infringement
which was videotaped and displayed along with the rest of the video
coverage of the race. Will we soon need a third empire ?

We all enjoyed such a race with many competitors and it has proven an
outstanding success to see so many 5o5s racing in the Quiberon bay. Of
course it is special since one can gain or loose so many places with one
single "bon coup" or mistake : however the confusion created by the many
boat wakes was very difficult to sail in.

Everybody is impressed with the huge task which has been completed by
the ENV and the international class team to organise the event so
smoothly.

The 5o5 family warmly welcomed Paul Henderson, the ISAF president, who
made the trip to Quiberon to attend the World championship, tomorrow and
Tuesday. Paul will have the opportunity to meet with the 5o5ers and sail
himself a 5o5 for the first time.

What will be remembered is the wonderful turnout and the beautiful 5o5
fleet racing in the Quiberon bay...

Regards


Jonathan Rennie and Jean-Baptiste Dupont

----------------

Race 2

Unlike the Americans yesterday, the Brits did not hoist the Union Jack
despite Ian Pinnell winning race 2 in very tactictal conditions.

The weather was unstable with wind blowing mainly from South West 2 to
3 and flukey. It was sunny most of the time but some rain showers cooled
down our competitors at times...

It was hard to find a gap at the buoy given the very large number of
boats on the racing course and the traffic is such that some spectacular
congestions of 505s have been common in the Quiberon bay area so far.

The Ecole Nationale de Voile is filming the race and shows the tape at
the bar... it is awesome and very instructive to watch the competitors
manoeuvering at full speed.

Ian Pinnell and his talented crew, Nick Powell, managed to work out the
conditions and their speed today was amazing... they had repaired the
boat the previous night since the forestay system fell apart in the
middle of race 1 preventing them from tuning the boat for light air...
only medium tuning was available for most of the race yesterday.

Howard Hamlin managed to finish second and thus takes the lead of the
championship. Howard, whom I interviewed tonight, was still very worried
of the outcome of the protest hearing he was involved in tonight for an
alleged fault that he had not exonarated himself quick enough according
to the German team Mulhbauer/Angela Stenger... Howard was relieved that
the jury considered that there was no fault even though he did it, the
jury agreed that Howard did not have to do the 720. (Howard was not too
upset despite the loss, for Ian's lead was really impressive and he
managed to pull back the two places he lost doing the 720 turn).

A new talented French sailor made the tens today. Laurent Hay is
a former 470 champion who took to the 505 a year ago and is improving
fast in the class.

Philippe Boite and Jean-Luc Muzellec have now a very slim chance left to
win the championship. They caught seaweed on the centerboard yesterday
and could not get rid off it easily, and today despite a very good start
they found themselves in the middle of a calm patch which made them
struggle in the fifties for some time.

Four protests were lodged with the jury which is still very reasonable
given the turnout. Two of them were lodged by the jury himself, one for
no buoyancy aid and another for start line infringement withe the guard
boat.

For the record, it is interesting to mention that the guard boat was
pretty agressive today since he hit one of the Britisch competitors
while manoeuvering around the pathfinder... After the race we learned
    that he broke his throttle and Vernon was cleared of the
    infringement...

Cheers

Jean-Baptiste

PS: We miss you all

----------------

Race 3

The Californian squad from Long Beach conforted their lead on the
championship making one and two at the third race today.

Weather was misty in the morning clearing up with wind changing in
strength and direction until the sea breeze settled and blew force 4 in
the end of the afternoon making this race fun and spectacular. (150+
boats on a tight reach with some spectacular fights to stay on the
line... wow!!!)

The place is very complex to sail and only the very top sailors manage
to work it out. It is a very selective race area and any minor mistake
results in a dramatic drop in the ranking... Ali who made a wonderful
start for instance got trapped by the shift of up to 15 degrees biaising
the line tremendeously.. forcing him to bear away in the shifting wind
to reach the mark together with all the early starters.

The Californian Andy Beeckman and his crew Ben Benjamin were the fastest
in these conditions followed by Howard Hamlin in good position to win
the championship... After three races only a few blokes can now pretend
to win the trophy and given the wind conditions are going to be light
all the way long, according to the met office , the big guys are not
lilkely to make it for their more than average results so far.

The fast american rigs (in light and medium air) with their long and
thin foils may well pave the way to improve the boat a bit more
eventhough this new way of sailing forces the crew to watch for seaweed
caught in the foils constantly during the race.... The point is that
they are damn fast at the moment...

Marcel Buffet in his late 70ties, rounded the windward mark 25th and
managed to finished 41st, proving that age does not matter as long as
the talent is there... Marcel has just found a new rig set up and he is
working it out better and better everyday.

It was "Caribean soiree" tonight at the venue with a killer punch who
almost made it impossible to send out today's report... but I made it
safe to the computer,... luckily , but hard though.

10 protests were lodged today but half of them were lodged by the jury
   itself... with only two disqualifications (by the way the results
   below are still provisional due to the "Caribean soiree")

Cheers

Jean-Baptiste

PS: we are having so much fun... and we still miss you all

----------------

Race 4

Our competitors were very surprised with the level of control put
forward by the French organizers (not the French class by the way).

Yesterday one competitor had his boat controlled and reweight this
morning under the threat to be excluded... luckily the boat was allright
and the race results were OK. Today 5 guys had to comply with the anti
doping controls... just as the tour de France cyclists.... three boats
failed the black band check (main sail over mast black band)...

Howard Hamlin won race 4 brillantly taking the lead from Andy Beeckman
still too inconsistant to win the trophy despite a great talent he
demonstrated in the former races and in leading the fleet after the
first beat today...

Krister Bergstroem finished second and Shoenherr third in his wonderfull
and flashy brand new Rondar very well fitted out.

The weather was pretty much the same as yesterday with a high over the
area bringing a typical thermal breeze in the afternoon making the race
fun to race and very spectacular in a force 3 to 4 breeze.

Pip Pearson chaired the annual AGM were several topics were discussed
such as the big spinnaker trials, the next coming World championships in
Durban, Portugal , Fremantle, and Sweden (full minutes will be hand out
later on)

About 12 protests were lodged today and will be investigated tomorrow
morning so the results published below are still provisionnal

Cheers

Jean-Baptiste

