1991 505 East Coast Championship

The West River Sailing Club and 505 Fleet 19 hosted the 1991 International 505
East Coast Championship on June 21-23. This event is rotated around the east
coast 505 fleets and only comes to Fleet 19 once every three or four years.
Twenty six 505s participated in the seven race, one throw-out series, racing in
conditions that ranged from light air and sunny to 25+ mph and rain.

Mike Punnett flew in from Idaho, his new home, and successfully defended the
East Coast Championship with crew Scott Ikle from Long Island. This was the
third year that this pair have won the event. Other teams arrived from Columbus
Ohio, Ottawa Ontario, Kingston Ontario, New England and the southern Chesapeake
Bay.

Race 1:

505 newcomers Nick Trotman/Josh Adams led early in a light-air race after
coming in from the right corner on the first beat. Mike Keegan/Dave Dyson were
second and Peter Mignerey/Monty Schumpert third at the first weather mark.
Keegan/Dyson led at the top of the second beat and held first to the finish.
Trotman/Adams held second, Jeff Boyd/Martin Tenhove were third, Ali Meller/Mike
Smith fourth, Mignerey/Schumpert fifth, Neal Fowler/Charles VanVoorhis sixth
and Punnet/Ikle seventh.

Race 2:

In conditions similar to Race 1, the lead changed several times around the race
course. Keegan/Dyson lead at the first mark with Rick Hewitt/Steve Lovshin
second, Mignerey/Schumpert third, Punnet/Ikle fourth and Fowler/VanVoorhis
fifth. Keegan/Dyson led most of the way around, but fell to third at the
finish, with Punnet/Ikle pulling through for the win, and Hewitt/Lovshin taking
second. Fowler/VanVoorhis were fourth, Boyd/Tenhove 5th and Henry Amthor/Barb
Amthor sixth.

After Friday's two races, and some post race camaraderie around the club, the
fleet headed out for the traditional East Coast Championship rowdy bar trip.

Race 3:

Saturday was a little windier than Friday, allowing the 505s to plane upwind
and down. Punnet/Ikle were first, Boyd/Tenhove second, Macy Nelson/John Fry
third, James L. Jacob/Jan Lynch fourth, Amthor/Amthor fifth, and Fowler/VanVoorhis
sixth.

Race 4:

Boyd/Tenhove and Fowler/VanVoorhis powered out from the start and led all
around the course. Meller/Smith took advantage of a starboard lift to pass
Fowler/VanVoorhis up the last beat. Boyd/Tenhove won, Meller/Smith were second,
Fowler/VanVoorhis third, Punnet/Ikle fourth and Tom Kivney/Dave Penfield fifth.

Race 5:

Shiftier winds made race 5 interesting. A progressive port lift strongly
favored those who went left early on the second beat. At the finish,
Punnet/Ikle were first, their third bullet of the series. Fowler/VanVoorhis
were second, Nelson/Fry third, Boyd/Tenhove fourth, Trotman/Adams fifth and
Shona Moss/Jason Blair sixth. Several tempting shifts on the port tack layline
lured Keegan/Dyson and Meller/Smith over to the left where they lost several
boats on the last beat, with Keegan Dyson finishing seventh, Amthor/Amthor
eighth, and Kivney/Penfield ninth.

After three hard races on Saturday, and a late return back to WRSC, the fleet
enjoyed a terrific, all-you-could-eat, steamed crab, fried chicken and corn
dinner. Local sailors drove home for a good night's sleep leaving some of the
visiting sailors still going strong at 11:00 at night.

Race 6:

Sunday morning was overcast, raining, and windy. Up the first beat, the left
was favored, as the top boat from the right side of the course rounded only
fifth. The 25+ mph tight first reach showed the 505 at its best, as the leaders
carried spinnakers to the gybe mark, and doused for the second -- even tighter
-- reach. Nelson/Fry held the lead easily after Fowler/VanVoorhis broke their
spinnaker halyard. Meller/Smith powered through to 2nd at the gybe mark, but
lost Punnet/Ikle at the top of the run. At the finish it was Nelson/Fry,
Punnet/Ikle, Meller/Smith, Boyd/Tenhove and Fowler/VanVoorhis who managed to
lose only one boat while sailing the run without a spinnaker. Their second
place gave the series to Punnet/Ikle, while Boyd/Tenhove had sealed up second
place in the series.

Race 7:

First and second place in the regatta having been decided, Punnet/Ikle and
Boyd/Tenhove sailed in. Unable to repair the spinnaker halyard on the water,
Fowler/VanVoorhis joined them, as did several of the lighter teams.

Nelson/Fry powered out to the left up the beat, and had a slim lead on
Keegan/Dyson at the windward mark, with Meller/Smith third. Keegan/Dyson
capsized at the leeward mark, letting Meller/Smith by, and letting the rest of
the fleet get close. Keegan/Dyson had an amazing recovery though, and closed on
Meller/Smith at the top of the second beat. With Nelson/Fry safely in first,
Meller/Smith and Keegan/Dyson dueled for second, and fourth place overall.
Keegan/Dyson led briefly on the run, but were passed shortly before the leeward
mark. The requisite tacking duel ensued, with Meller/Smith losing Keegan/Dyson
on the last tack before the finish when their jib sheets came unshackled from
the jib. Nelson/Fry won the race, and took third overall, Keegan/Dyson were
second, good for fourth overall, while Meller/Smith took third, and fifth
overall.

Conclusion:

The racing was close, with different teams showing strengths in the varied
conditions. Mike Punnett/Scott Ikle seemed to have lost their speed edge of
years past, but were never slow, and were usually able to recover. Canadians
Jeff Boyd/Martin Tenhove sailed a very consistent series, never finishing out
of the top five, despite their light weight. Macy Nelson/John Fry had some bad
races early in the series, but excellent sailing in the windier Sunday races,
and Fowler/VanVoorhis's broken spinnaker halyard pulled them into third.
Fowler/VanVoorhis dropped to sixth when the broken spinnaker halyard gave them
finishes of fifth and DNS for the last two races. They had sailed a very
consistent series until the breakdown, never winning a race, but always
managing to be in the running. RC chairman Steve Kling and his committee of
Star sailors and staff from Marmaduke's Pub did a great job for the 505s. The
505s hope to return the favor when they run the Michelob Cup for the Star
class.

Overall the event was quite a success. The Chesapeake Bay delivered some great
racing conditions, the fleet enjoyed some good hard racing (and some great
spiced crab), and competitors left with fond memories of some great spinnaker
reaches. Most of the competitors will be in Hyannis Cape Cod on August 12th for
the start of the North American Championship. With the fleet this close, and
the addition of some fast West Coast boats, who knows who will come out on top?
