The 1989 505 North American Championship
by Ali Meller

OK, so it happened 9 years ago... but this turned up in the 505
archives.... and now you can read about it on the web site...

The 1989 North American Championship was held at Kingston's Portsmouth
Olympic Harbour, site of the 1976 Olympic sailing events and future site
of the 1990 505 World Championship. Six races were held, with all but
the last on the 'inside' course. Though close to land and unsuitable for
a World Championship, the inside course has the advantage of being
a 3 minute sail from the harbour. Gate starts were used for the last two
races. Conditions were close to ideal with warm water and air, and good
breezes. Compass bearings were similar all week, as the wind direction
did not vary much from race to race and day to day.

Race 1

I distinctly remember checking upwind speed against Ethan Bixby/Cam
Lewis and Macy Nelson/Mike Martin prior to the start, and concluding
that we were at least as fast as Bixby/Lewis upwind, by footing faster.

I have no idea how they did it, as we weren't anywhere near them, but
Bixby/Lewis were 1st, Mike Punnet/Scott/Ikle 2nd, defending champions
Jeff Miller/Bruce Heckman (sailing a borrowed boat) 3rd, and Neal
Fowler/Duncan Skinner 4th. Winds were strong enough to make the reaches
exciting.

Race 2

With slightly more wind, the second race saw many of the same boats in
the top positions. Bixby/Lewis won again, with Nelson/Martin taking
second. A last leeward mark capsize dropped Punnet/Ikle to 8th.
Fowler/Skinner were 3rd, with Ali Meller/Mike Smith 4th, just ahead of
Miller/Heckman. Planing upwind was fast, as was going left on the beats.
The reaches were great!

Race 3

The winds were lighter for the Thursday morning race. We were over early
at the pin end, and found the fleet seemingly minutes ahead of us just
20 seconds after the start. We were so far behind that all I know of
this race is from the results sheet. The lighter conditions saw some
different boats at the front, with Miller/Heckman taking 1st, Ellen
Ablow/Allan Norman 2nd, Dave Penfield/Dave Dyson 3rd, Paul Tara/?
Hopkins 4th and Bixby/Lewis 5th.

Race 4

The winds filled in for the 4th race, and the light air specialists
relinquished the front positions to Bixby/Lewis, Nelson/Martin,
Punnet/Ikle, Meller/Smith and Fowler/Skinner. The left side often payed
off during the series, with this race being a good example. Punnet/Ikle
were very fast off the wind, passing several boats on the reaches, but
Bixby/Lewis lead throughout, never seriously threatened.

Race 5

The Race Committee signalled an extended course for this race, and
a gate start. The left side did not pay early on the first beat, as
Bodie/Eley (the wabbit) looked very good early on. Bixby/Lewis,
Punnet/Ikle and many of the other regatta leaders who had started early
to go left, found themselves digging hard to get back in front. Several
shifts made this a very interesting beat. At the first mark, Punnet/Ikle
and Bixby/Lewis had worked there way into the lead from quite far back.
The wind was a little lighter, and the wild ride down the first reach
did not materialize, bunching the fleet up as it approached the gybe
mark. The wind died somewhat for part of the race, and the right side
payed off at times, though when the wind filled in again, it was from
the left side. Bixby/Lewis were 1st again, clinching the Championship.
Punnet/Ikle had the lead at the top of the run, but relinquished it
while trying to fix a problem that prevented them from hoisting their
chute. They finished 2nd. Jim Englert/Jim Alman were 3rd after a close
race with Gary Bodie/Kevin Eley, who finished 4th. Nelson/Martin
lee-bowed Meller/Smith just before the finish to take 5th.

The changing conditions made this an interesting race. On US7093, easing
the shroulds automatically eases the ram to compensate for the mast
moving forward. Similarly, the jib cloth tension is automatically
adjusted to compensate when the forestay setting is altered. Bixby/Lewis
adjusted the rig during the race to compensate for the changing
conditions.

Race 6

Weather and scheduling finally allowed the RC to signal 'alternate
venue', so the fleet sailed out passed Snake island in a light breeze.
With 1st overall packed and gone, the race was for 2nd place, with
Punnet/Ikle holding a slight lead over Nelson/Martin and Miller/Heckamn.

The wind died as the fleet arrived at the Committee boat. The RC
postponed for about an hour, and then went through the gate start
sequence in a slowly building breeze. At the start, it was very marginal
trapezing in flat water. I'm not sure why, but starting late in the
gate, or going slightly right was a slight advantage that became very
significant as the fleet arrived very bunched at the windward mark. The
rabbit, Brown/Cragg, had a comfortable lead, but Simon Lewis/Nick Lewis,
Nelson/Martin, Meller/Smith, Jeff Boyd/Ian Eskritt, Ablow/Norman and
Miller/Heckamn all arrived at the mark together. A seconds delay getting
the chute up was death, as you were rolled by the five boats behind you
in short order. Punnet/Ikle powered through from behind to be in
contention at the leeward mark. Nelson/Martin passed Brown/Cragg on the
beat, but lost the lead on the run and decided to go after Punnet/Ikle.
This gave the race to Brown/Cragg, though the battle for second overall
made the race for 2nd through 4th in the race very interesting. At the
finish it was Nelson/Martin, Miller/Heckman and Punnet/Ikle finishing
all together in that order. The tie for second was broken in
Nelson/Martin's favour. Ablow/Norman's 5th pulled them into 6th overall.

Overall, Bixby/Lewis were 1st, Nelson/Martin 2nd, Punnet/Ikle 3rd,
Miller/Heckman 4th, Fowler/Skinner 5th, Ablow/Norman 6th, and
Englert/Alman 7th.

It was clear that no-one was in a position to seriously challenge
Bixby/Lewis. Virtually nothing on US7093 has been altered since it won
the 1981 and 1982 World Championships, except for a new suit of Ethan's
sails (now North). Bixby/Lewis have sailed 505s only occasionally since
1981. It isn't clear where this leaves supposed tuning improvements
developed since then. Bixby and Lewis are both very talented sailors,
while Nelson/Martin were sailing their first serious regatta together,
and Punnet/Ikle and Miller/Heckamn were both racing borrowed boats. It
probably would have been closer 2nd, 3rd and 4th place teams had been
sailing their own boats, or had had more practice in Nelson/Martin's
case.

Bixby/Lewis did not have a blinding speed advantage over the others
(they were never slower though), they just declined to make any
mistakes. They always seemed to emerge from the start with clear air,
and go the right way. Punnet/Ikle, on the other hand, seemed quite fast
at times, probably as they are light and like to foot. They had to fight
there way through in several races after rounding the 1st mark out of
the top boats. Their ability to work the boat payed off handsomely on
the reaches and runs.

Though the winds were strong enough to provide very enjoyable 505
sailing, they were not particularly strong. Races 2 and 4 were the
windiest, in a steady 18 knots. The Kingston waves provided excellent
opportunities to pump downwind.

Gear among the top boats showed some variety, with 1,2,5,7,9,10 (all
sailing on the US East Coast) using Ethan's jib and main designs on
Proctor D (mostly?) masts. 3,4, used the D as well, though with other
sails. Bixby/Lewis (1st) used an Ethan designed North chute, while
2,3,4,8,9 used Danger chutes or the No. 1 chute the Danger is based on.
3rd used Danger main and jibs as well, while 4th used No. 1 sails that
the Dangers are similar to. 8th used a Goldspar mast. 10th used the Hyde
2E spinnaker design that some Europeans including Bergstrom favour. I'm
not sure of the other gear in the top ten.

If you missed this regatta, you get another chance next year when the
pre-worlds and the world championship are held in Kingston during
August. Plan to make this trip even if you have not already qualified
for the worlds. There will be worlds spots up for grabs at the
pre-worlds! Kingston is a great place to sail, and a fun place to spend
a week or two. See you there!

