Ethan Bixby <eebixby@gmail.com> Tue 4 Feb


Hi all you 505 sailors,
2025 505 Florida Midwinters

55th running of the event



Once again the 505 fleet converged on the Clearwater Community Sailing
Center for the Florida Midwinters, Jan 24-26.


Teams from the Baltimore-Washington-Annapolis area, Toronto, and
Kingston fled a wintry blast to escape to the Florida sun and hopefully
some warmth, joining several local teams.


Thanks again to Ethan and Trudy, Nathaniel and Shelia for hosting many
competitors, and to the CCSC, Justin and staff, for another terrific
Midwinters. PRO Donna Sue ran a great series with a small RC in trying
conditions.  And it’s probably her 10th year helping out as the PRO!


The wintry blast came south with competitors. The scheduled Tuesday to
Thursday practice days turned into short sorties by a few teams, brief
line ups, and then heading in before losing feeling in hands and
fingers. It was 22+ knots, and in the mid 40’s, so only the dedicated or
desperate went out!


But the trend was warming, so the fleet sailed out Friday hoping for
slightly warmer conditions. One breezy race was held before the fleet
was sent in. There were several spectacular capsizes and a bent mast in
the 22+ knots of cold breeze. The waves were from New Orleans!


Saturday was incrementally warmer, and four races were held in less
intense conditions. Solid wire running all the time, so probably 12-18.


After five races Ted and Ethan had a near lock on the series, with all
bullets including their throw out. Bobby and Augie were the most
consistent of the rest, holding down second overall.


The first challenge Sunday morning was getting to CCSC, as a marathon
and half marathon were being run out of the park across the street, and
traffic was backed up on Gulf Blvd.


There was an onshore postponement waiting for wind. It was warmer than
before and more comfortable sailing in lighter air. The breeze has gone
right, so off the shore, puffy and shifty. One race was completed before
conditions deteriorated. Ted and Ethan won again with Bobby and Augie
second.


The RC then ran another gate start so the fleet could race back to
shore.


After some busy 505 packing, prizes were awarded by guest celebrity
Peter Hale, former 505 sailor.


Some Thoughts:

It was great to see Augie back in a 505!


There were several new teams, with a talented Marblehead team sailing
Andrew Jones’ boat from St. Petersburg.   Also notable were Macy’s WRSC
training program teams, and new to 505 sailors on Toronto and Northern
VA teams.


There were some interesting sails in use. Nathaniel and Eric were using
the North RM-1 mainsail. This main is a development of Ethan’s M10
design, a bit flatter up high, with a different panel layout. They used
Ethan’s J-14 jib. This sail combination won the Adelaide 505 Worlds
a few weeks ago. Ethan was using the M-10 main with an N-9 jib.


Two teams had great looking new Doyle laminate jibs.  Ali lent Ted and
Ethan his prototype KSL spinnaker for the last race.


There were two forward tack 505s in the fleet, and they finished 1st and
2nd.


Ty Baird did some amazing drone footage and edited to share.  This is
a class funded promotional work, so enjoy it and share it.

https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fo/9quw47ez0sc53hbptyphu/AK5FWUXwOT7t_HH33zoOCAY?rlkey=rxgp0vgkha03z2xkapj8t0nob&e=1&st=x8jdbzbx&dl=0


For 2026 we will try to push back to February or early March if
possible.

Also, we are running a clinic in Clearwater on March 13-16.  Contact
Ethan if you are interested.



Report by Ali Meller and Ethan Bixby
