Santa Cruz report

2025-04-29

This past weekend 13 505â€™s took to the Monterey Bay to race for the
Spring Open. The weather forecast was interesting, with cloud and
occasional rain on Saturday, normally not a good set up for breeze.
However, all the models were saying 10-15. As it turned out, we had
substantially more, with the wind gusting into the mid twenties at
times.

The racing on Saturday was a little Ground Hog day, Mike and Adam won
all 4 races, although hotly chased, they were never beaten. Nick and
Eric scored three seconds, but blotted their card with an OCS and Holty
and Pat, making a welcome return, were the best of the rest. Chris and
Jon also had a good day, improving every race to end with two third
place finishes.

Following racing a thorough debrief was done, no details here, you have
to be there! After that we had a BBQ at the YC.

Sunday was a very different affair, with conditions I have not seen
before in Santa Cruz. The wind was around 20 degrees right of normal and
the start was 1/2 mile further left giving us a new race track and
different wind. It was also puffy and shifty, between 10 and 16 knots
I would guess. In these conditions racing was tight and new teams had
their moments. Bob and Steve scored a couple of 2nd place finishes and
Mike P and Bruce, Jimmy and Bjorn and others all had good moments. The
first three boats all finished the day with 10 points which shows how
close it was, but the first days dominance meant Adam and Mike were the
winners, from Nick and Eric and Holty and Pat third.

Great weekend, felt like we were sailing at a new venue!


Mike Holt
