https://www.yachtsandyachting.com/news/287138/Conrads-Bell-win-505-Pacific-Coast-Championship

Conrads, Bell win 505 Pacific Coast Championship at Bellingham Yacht Club

by Lexi Pline 16 Jun 23:43 BST
June 13-15, 2025

After three days and 11 races, AJ Conrads and Jon Bell captured the 505
Pacific Coast Championship by one point, narrowly besting former World
Champion and Long Beach legend Howie Hamlin and crew Jeff Nelson.
Bellingham Bay delivered for the fleet, providing champagne 10-12 knots
on Friday and Saturday before breeze began to lighten up on Sunday.

It was a close battle in the top three all weekend, with Conrads
trailing Hamlin until the final two races - where her light air boat
handling skills and sharp tactics helped her put up a 1-1 and win the
title with 18 points. Over the three days, Conrads and Bell racked up
five race wins - nearly half of all races completed! Hamlin finished
close behind with 19 points after an otherwise extremely consistent
event, with only one score outside the top three.

Conrads and Bell contribute their success to good starts, fleet
management and a deep downwind mode, allowing them to sail a shorter
distance to the mark. The pair began sailing together at the North
Americans in 2024 after years of sailing 505s, and together this was
their first championship win in the class.

Not far behind and rounding out the podium were Mike Holt and Rob
Woelfel, who fought to break through but finished in third overall with
23 points. The team had a great rally on Saturday, pulling a hat trick
to win the day's final three races.

"It was a great weekend - Bellingham really showed out for everyone,"
said organizer (and event participant) Blaine Pedlow. "It's great to see
a changing of the guard and have some new names on the PCCs trophy!"
