anadian 505 Championships
by Ali Meller
reprinted from Fall 1994 Tank Talk

The '94 Canadians was a great event with a large turnout of competitive
boats. The three day event was held July 1st-3rd, at Kingston Yacht Club
in Kingston, Ontario. Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, home of the '76
Olympic Sailing events, the '89 505 NAs and the '90 Worlds, is a couple
of miles east of KYC.

Kingston is home to Canadian aces Jeff Boyd and Martin tenHove, Adam and
Renka Gesing, Steve and Barb Yates, and a KYC-owned boat that is made
available to young sailors, and which raced in the event. Regatta
entertainment included fireworks, as Canada Day is July 1st.

Jeff Boyd not only organized the event, but he and his wife, Florence,
put up most of the fleet in their home. It isn't clear if all those
people were actually invited, or if they just declined to leave after
the Friday evening party.

There were two races Friday in a classic Kingston breeze of 15-18 knots.
The wind and waves are both affected by the funneling effect of Wolfe
island and the Kingston shoreline, making for great 505 sailing, less
than a minute off the dock.

Boyd/tenHove and Meller/Johnson both showed great speed in the
conditions, with Meller/Johnson leading at the windward mark, but losing
Boyd/tenHove at the last leeward mark.

In the second race, Meller/Johnson drag raced to the left corner again,
and led at every mark. Boyd/tenHove dropped back to 4th while doing
circles for touching Meller/Johnson at the first leeward mark, but great
speed and going the right way put them back in the hunt. They finished
2nd behind Meller/Johnson.

Saturday looked to be a repeat of Friday's conditions, but started
a little lighter and went lighter as the day went on. The last race
featured a major shift as a new weather system came through. The 505s
raced the last 2 legs right up against the Kingston shoreline. The
shifty last beat made for some interesting tactics. Simon Lewis of
Toronto passed several boats on the last beat, finishing in the top 5.
Fowler/Dyson sailed very smart in these conditions, winning race
5 easily.

Meller/Johnson were leading after two days, and were the rabbit for the
6th race Sunday morning. The wind had shifted around to the east, and
was much lighter. This penultimate race only served to bring the top
four boats closer for the last race. Going into the last race,
Meller/Johnson led, with Boyd/tenHove 2nd, Nelson/Alarie 3rd, and
Fowler/Dyson 4th.

Meller/Johnson led at the first three marks, but lost Fowler/Dyson part
way up the 2nd beat. Fowler/Dyson again put on a tactical racing clinic,
slowly opening up lead. Near the top of the beat, Nelson/Alarie pulled
up into 2nd on a right shift. All four boats were close down the light
air run. Up the last beat, Meller/Johnson went left with Boyd/tenHove,
while Nelson/Alarie went right closer to the Wolfe island shore. Though
Fowler/Dyson had a good lead, the next three were close. The regatta
wasn't decided until the top of the beat when Nelson/Alarie crossed
Boyd/tenHove on the finish line. With Fowler/Dyson 1st, Nelson/Alarie
2nd, Boyd/tenHove 3rd and Meller/Johnson 4th, the four teams managed to
finish the regatta in that order, separated by 1.25 points.
Nelson/Alarie's throwout was a 3rd!

Next stop the North Americans!
