1995 505 Pacific Coast Championships

By Mike Martin

The 505 Class does not run a US National Championship, but rather holds a North
American Championship in the US or Canada - we're hoping Mexico will put in a
bid someday - and two coastal championships, the East Coast Championship, and
the Pacific Coast Championship in lieu of a US National Championship.  The 1995
Pacific Coast Championships were held at Santa Cruz Yacht Club over September
8, 9, 10. The series started on Friday in light air (for Santa Cruz) marginal
trapezeing. Only two of the three scheduled races were run due to diminishing
breeze. Both races were tight battles with several different boats leading the
races at different points.  Pete Melvin and I had good speed using a newly
developed Danger main with maximum roach at all points, it looked a little
funny but seemed to be very fast. With the help of this sail we were lucky
enough to be in the lead at the finish, to win both races. However, this is
where our luck ran out. While lifting the boat out of the water, the ring of
our lifting bridle broke and Mr. boat met Mr. concrete seawall in a big way.
The only thing that dampened the fall was the rig getting caught up in the
crane which ripped the spreader off and bent the mast. As I heard the stomach
turning sound of cracking Kevlar and crushing honeycomb, I thought so much for
that boat, and regatta for that matter. The only positive thought that went
through my head was at least we are in Santa Cruz and Larry Tuttles' shop
(Waterat) is only a mile away.

With only minor begging and pleading, Larry brought the boat into his shop and
started to cut and rip at the bottom with a glorified carpet knife. A sight and
sound as hard to stomach as the original incident. After an initial inspection
Larry told us to get lost and come back the next morning. Upon returning the
next morning we found Larry polishing off the bottom of the boat around the
repairs, which were hard to find without close inspection.

Editor's Note: In a converstation with me, Larry pointed out that our strong
and stiff fully cored hulls are able to absorb a considerable amount of force.
If this had happened to a conventional polyester, non cored hull, there would
have been multiple pieces or at least a huge hole in the boat resulting in
total destruction.

The boat fell over ten feet, hit the concrete sea wall, bounced from there down
to the dock another four feet, and off the dock into the water. The boat was
NOT holed, but the outer skin suffered cracks and fractures. It was determined
that the boat could actually have been raced as it stood, prior to the repair.
Some of you may remember hearing about Howard Hamlin's own boat coming off its
trailer and bouncing end for end down the interstate, with minimal damage. The
strength of the Waterat 505, and many of the Hamlin and Lindsays is incredible.
You may also be interested in Howard Hamlin's 505 Interstate Flying article.

So we loaded up the boat and headed back to the yacht club and started to
install the spare rig. The wind cooperated with us and stayed dead calm,
causing a postponement, and allowing us extra time to get everything squared
away. Unfortunately the wind never came up at all that day. Dave Wally wisely
abandoned racing at 4:00 allowing us time to go surfing before heading to the
big party at Jim Maloney's house to celebrate Jeff Miller getting his Ph.D.,
and marking the end of his 35 years of education. It was a great social event
with lots of food and beer for everyone.

Sunday morning rolled around with a light breeze filling in allowing us to get
three races in. Again the conditions were marginal trapezeing and we had more
tight racing with different leaders on almost every leg of every race. With our
boat in one piece, and our luck returning, Pete and I managed to win all three
races on Sunday as well, to finish the regatta with a perfect score. In a
ferocious battle for second place the famous Howard Hamlin with a borrowed boat
and I 14 Crew Mike Jankowski beat out local favorites Dave Shelton and Bruce
Edwards. Getting seconds in the last two races were Mike Holt, who came all the
way from England just for this regatta, and Brad Cole who beat out 8 time
P.C.C. champ Jeff Miller and Bruce Heckman for fourth place. Also in the money
were Don Smith with guest driver Mike Punnett. They were followed by only one
point by Tom Poore and Tim Park. Complete results are listed below.


