Day 1

Hello to all from sunny Durban!

We are part way through measurement so far today, the pre-worlds start
tomorrow. We have about 65 505s and about 22 Flying Dutchman registered.

It is quite hot, very sunny, winds are quite light, but there is a nice
surf on the beach. The beer (and food) is very good, and very
inexpensive. It's wonderful to see more and more friends in the dinghy
park.

I sailed yesterday in about 7-12 knots and great waves; going downwind
when you hook up on a wave, you can surf quite a while, going fast
enough to collapse the main and the kite.  AWESOME!! Wait till it gets
windier!!

Well back to working on the boat and measurement.


Cheers,

Ali Meller

VP International 505 class yacht racing association


---------------

Day 6

Mike Martin and Steve Bourdow Win Both Races and Take the Lead!

In sunny light-to-medium (mostly light) conditions, Californians Mike
Martin and Steve Bourdow won both of today's races and took the overall
lead away from Race One Winners Howard Hamlin and Peter Alarie. With
three races completed, and with a maximum of three more possible in the
next two days, this sets up a great battle between the 1999 505 World
Champion skipper, Howard Hamlin, and the 1999 505 World Champion crew,
Mike Martin. Currently in third overall is four time 505 World Champion
Krister Bergstrom, racing with Thomas Moss. The top three teams are
within one point overall, with fourth place close behind.  The
Bergstrom/Moss team have been very consistent with finishes of 2,4,2,
while Martin/Bourdow were 7th in Race 1, and may be able to throw that
    result out when a fourth race is completed.

"We gated early in the first race", said Martin.  "Steve [Bourdow] was
all over the shifts and we slowly worked our way into the lead." The
Martin/Bourdow team passed silver medalist Ian Barker, sailing with his
long time 505 crew Danny Cripps, on the third beat, and stretched
a little for comfort over the remaining legs, winning by about 50 yards.

"In the second race, we tacked on them [Martin/Bourdow] on the first
beat and sent them left", said Peter Alarie. "They found a shift and
came back in ahead of us." Both these teams rounded the first windward
mark in the teens, but both used excellent reaching speed to close on
the early leaders; Martin/Bourdow rounded the first leeward mark fourth.
Martin/Bourdow played shifts to get into second, where they stayed most
of the race, and then got a big left hand shift on the last beat to take
the lead from the Danish team of Jan Saugmann and Morten Ramsbaek.

"I just drove the boat", said Martin. "And when I looked up Steve had us
in the lead."

With a promising forecast for tomorrow -- NE 15-20 knots, going E/NE
15-25, and 3.5 -- 4.5 meter swells - competitors are looking forward to
two more good races tomorrow.


---------------

Day 7

Krister Bergstrom/Thomas Moss Win Two Windy Races and Take the Lead


Four time 505 world champion, Krister Bergstrom, racing with Thomas Moss
led both races from start to finish, winning both, and taking the
overall lead in the 2000 World Championship with one race to go. The
Bergstrom/Moss team had good gate starts, went the right way, and had
very impressive speed.

Wind was in the 18-23 knot range, with large swells and waves;
incredible surfing conditions downwind.

Bergstrom won the 1987 and '88 worlds with Olle Wenrup -- who is now
racing with Ebbe Rosen -- and the '89 and '91 worlds with P. Anders
Hallberg. He is one of two four time 505 world champions, and winning
this event would put him ahead of Peter Colclough the only other four
time International 505 world champion.

Yesterday's leaders, Mike Martin/Steve Bourdow, had finishes of 4,3
today, while the Hamlin/Alarie team were 5,4 today. 49er Silver medalist
Ian Barker was 2,6, while UK and European 505 Champions Ian Pinnell/Nick
Powell were 3,2.

It is going to come down to the final race, tomorrow. Martin/Bourdow can
catch Bergstrom/Moss, while both Hamlin/Alarie and Barker/Cripps can
catch Martin/Bourdow.  "Krister will be all over us" said Steve Bourdow.
"But we'll be ready."

